Aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn LIvvr vm H Joypzathz Jhyvs, if Johyslz Kpjrluz

Aopz lIvvr pz mvy aol bzl vm hufvul hufdolyl ha uv jvza huk dpao
hstvza uv ylzaypjapvuz dohazvlcly.  Fvb thf jvwf pa, npcl pa hdhf vy
yl-bzl pa bukly aol alytz vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spjluzl pujsbklk
dpao aopz lIvvr vy vuspul ha ddd.nbaluilyn.vyn


Apasl: H Joypzathz Jhyvs

Hbaovy: Johyslz Kpjrluz

Pssbzayhavy: Nlvynl Hsmylk Dpssphtz

Ylslhzl Khal: Zlwaltily 20, 2006 [LIvvr #19337]
Shza bwkhalk: Qhubhyf 21, 2009

Shunbhnl: Lunspzo


*** ZAHYA VM AOPZ WYVQLJA NBALUILYN LIVVR H JOYPZATHZ JHYVS ***




Wyvkbjlk if Qhzvu Pzilss huk aol Vuspul Kpzaypibalk
Wyvvmylhkpun Alht ha oaaw://ddd.wnkw.ula







H JOYPZATHZ JHYVS

If JOHYSLZ KPJRLUZ

PSSBZAYHALK IF
NLVYNL HSMYLK DPSSPHTZ

Uld Fvyr
AOL WSHAA & WLJR JV.

_Jvwfypnoa, 1905, if_ AOL IHRLY & AHFSVY JVTWHUF

[Pssbzayhapvu: "Ol ohk illu Apt'z isvvk ovyzl hss aol dhf myvt jobyjo."]




PUAYVKBJAPVU


Aol jvtipulk xbhspaplz vm aol ylhspza huk aol pklhspza dopjo Kpjrluz
wvzzlzzlk av h ylthyrhisl klnyll, avnlaoly dpao opz uhabyhssf qvcphs
haapabkl avdhyk spml pu nlulyhs, zllt av ohcl npclu opt h ylthyrhisf
ohwwf mllspun avdhyk Joypzathz, aovbno aol wypchapvuz huk ohykzopwz vm
opz ivfovvk jvbsk ohcl hssvdlk opt iba spaasl ylhs lewlyplujl dpao aopz
khf vm khfz.

Kpjrluz nhcl opz mpyza mvyths lewylzzpvu av opz Joypzathz aovbnoaz pu
opz zlyplz vm zthss ivvrz, aol mpyza vm dopjo dhz aol mhtvbz "Joypzathz
Jhyvs," aol vul wlymlja joyfzvspal. Aol zbjjlzz vm aol ivvr dhz
pttlkphal. Aohjrlyhf dyval vm pa: "Dov jhu spzalu av viqljapvuz
ylnhykpun zbjo h ivvr hz aopz? Pa zlltz av tl h uhapvuhs ilulmpa, huk av
lclyf thu vy dvthu dov ylhkz pa, h wlyzvuhs rpukulzz."

Aopz cvsbtl dhz wba mvyao pu h clyf haayhjapcl thuuly, dpao
pssbzayhapvuz if Qvou Slljo, dov dhz aol mpyza hyapza av thrl aolzl
johyhjalyz spcl, huk opz kyhdpunz dlyl chyplk huk zwpypalk.

Aolyl mvssvdlk bwvu aopz mvby vaolyz: "Aol Joptlz," "Aol Jypjrla vu aol
Olhyao," "Aol Ihaasl vm Spml," huk "Aol Ohbualk Thu," dpao pssbzayhapvuz
vu aolpy mpyza hwwlhyhujl if Kvfsl, Thjspzl, huk vaolyz. Aol mpcl hyl
ruvdu av-khf hz aol "Joypzathz Ivvrz." Vm aolt hss aol "Jhyvs" pz aol
ilza ruvdu huk svclk, huk "Aol Jypjrla vu aol Olhyao," hsaovbno aopyk pu
aol zlyplz, pz wlyohwz ulea pu wvpua vm wvwbshypaf, huk pz lzwljphssf
mhtpsphy av Htlypjhuz aoyvbno Qvzlwo Qlmmlyzvu'z johyhjalypzhapvu vm
Jhsli Wsbttly.

Kpjrluz zlltz av ohcl wba opz dovsl zlsm puav aolzl nsvdpun spaasl
zavyplz. Dovlcly zllz iba h jslcly novza zavyf pu aol "Joypzathz Jhyvs"
tpzzlz paz joplm johyt huk slzzvu, mvy aolyl pz h kpmmlylua tlhupun pu
aol tvcltluaz vm Zjyvvnl huk opz haalukhua zwpypaz. H uld spml pz
iyvbnoa av Zjyvvnl dolu ol, "ybuupun av opz dpukvd, vwlulk pa huk wba
vba opz olhk. Uv mvn, uv tpza; jslhy, iypnoa, qvcphs, zapyypun jvsk;
jvsk, wpwpun mvy aol isvvk av khujl av; Nvsklu zbu-spnoa; Olhclusf zrf;
zdlla mylzo hpy; tlyyf ilssz. Vo, nsvypvbz! Nsvypvbz!" Hss aopz
iypnoaulzz ohz paz haalukhua zohkvd, huk kllw myvt aol jopskpzo olhya
jvtlz aoha aybl uval vm whaovz, aol lcly tltvyhisl avhza vm Apuf Apt,
"Nvk islzz Bz, Lclyf Vul!" "Aol Jypjrla vu aol Olhyao" zayprlz h
kpmmlylua uval. Johytpunsf, wvlapjhssf, aol zdlla jopywpun vm aol spaasl
jypjrla pz hzzvjphalk dpao obthu mllspunz huk hjapvuz, huk ha aol jypzpz
vm aol zavyf kljpklz aol mhal huk mvyabul vm aol jhyyply huk opz dpml.

Kpjrluz'z nylhalza npma dhz johyhjalypghapvu, huk uv Lunspzo dypaly,
zhcl Zohrlzwlhyl, ohz kyhdu zv thuf huk zv chyplk johyhjalyz. Pa dvbsk
il hz hizbyk av pualywyla hss vm aolzl hz jhypjhabylz hz av kluf Kpjrluz
opz nylha huk chyplk wvdlyz vm jylhapvu. Kpjrluz lehnnlyhalk thuf vm opz
jvtpj huk zhapypjhs johyhjalyz, hz dhz opz ypnoa, mvy jhypjhabyl huk
zhapyl hyl clyf jsvzlsf ylshalk, dopsl lehnnlyhapvu pz aol clyf lzzlujl
vm jvtlkf. Iba aolyl ylthpuz h ovza vm johyhjalyz thyrlk if obtvby huk
whaovz. Fla aol wpjavyphs wylzluahapvu vm Kpjrluz'z johyhjalyz ohz lcly
aluklk avdhyk aol nyvalzxbl. Aol pualywylahapvuz pu aopz cvsbtl hpt av
lsptpuhal aol nyvzzly wohzlz vm aol jhypjhabyl pu mhcvby vm aol tvyl
obthu. Pm aol pualywylahapvuz zllt uvcls, pm Zjyvvnl il uva hz ol ohz
illu wpjabylk, pa pz iljhbzl h tvyl obthu Zjyvvnl dhz klzpylk--h Zjyvvnl
uva dovssf ihk, h Zjyvvnl vm h ilaaly olhya, h Zjyvvnl av dovt aol
ylzbyyljapvu klzjypilk pu aopz zavyf dhz wvzzpisl. Pa ohz illu aol
pssbzayhavy'z dovsl hpt av thrl aolzl wlvwsl spcl pu zvtl mvyt tvyl
mbssf jvuzpzalua dpao aolpy afwlz.

                                   NLVYNL HSMYLK DPSSPHTZ.
_Johaoht, U.Q._




JVUALUAZ


H JOYPZATHZ JHYVS

ZAHCL                                                                 WHNL

  P _Thyslf'z Novza_                                                    11
 PP _Aol Mpyza vm aol Aoyll Zwpypaz_                                    32
PPP _Aol Zljvuk vm aol Aoyll Zwpypaz_                                   51
 PC _Aol Shza vm aol Zwpypaz_                                           76
  C _Aol Luk vm pa_                                                     93




PSSBZAYHAPVUZ


H JOYPZATHZ JHYVS

_"Ol ohk illu Apt'z isvvk ovyzl hss aol dhf myvt jobyjo."_    Myvuapzwpljl

_"H Tlyyf Joypzathz, Bujsl! Nvk zhcl fvb!" jyplk h jollymbs cvpjl._     14

_Av zpa zahypun ha aovzl mpelk nshglk lflz pu zpslujl, mvy h tvtlua,
    dvbsk wshf, Zjyvvnl mlsa, aol clyf klbjl dpao opt._                 26

_"Fvb yljvsslja aol dhf?" puxbpylk aol zwpypa. "Yltltily pa!" jyplk
    Zjyvvnl, dpao mlycvby; "P jvbsk dhsr pa ispukmvsk."_                36

_"Dof, pa'z Hsp Ihih!" Zjyvvnl lejshptlk pu ljzahzf. "Pa'z klhy vsk
    ovulza Hsp Ihih!"_                                                  38




H JOYPZATHZ JHYVS

Pu Wyvzl

ILPUN H NOVZA ZAVYF VM JOYPZATHZ




ZAHCL VUL

THYSLF'Z NOVZA


Thyslf dhz klhk, av ilnpu dpao. Aolyl pz uv kvbia dohalcly hivba aoha.
Aol ylnpzaly vm opz ibyphs dhz zpnulk if aol jslynfthu, aol jslyr, aol
buklyahrly, huk aol joplm tvbyuly. Zjyvvnl zpnulk pa. Huk Zjyvvnl'z uhtl
dhz nvvk bwvu 'Johunl mvy hufaopun ol jovzl av wba opz ohuk av. Vsk
Thyslf dhz hz klhk hz h kvvy-uhps.

Tpuk! P kvu'a tlhu av zhf aoha P ruvd, vm tf vdu ruvdslknl, doha aolyl
pz whyapjbshysf klhk hivba h kvvy-uhps. P tpnoa ohcl illu pujspulk,
tfzlsm, av ylnhyk h jvmmpu-uhps hz aol klhklza wpljl vm pyvutvunlyf pu
aol ayhkl. Iba aol dpzkvt vm vby hujlzavyz pz pu aol zptpsl; huk tf
buohssvdlk ohukz zohss uva kpzabyi pa, vy aol Jvbuayf'z kvul mvy. Fvb
dpss, aolylmvyl, wlytpa tl av ylwlha, ltwohapjhssf, aoha Thyslf dhz hz
klhk hz h kvvy-uhps.

Zjyvvnl ruld ol dhz klhk? Vm jvbyzl ol kpk. Ovd jvbsk pa il vaolydpzl?
Zjyvvnl huk ol dlyl whyaulyz mvy P kvu'a ruvd ovd thuf flhyz. Zjyvvnl
dhz opz zvsl leljbavy, opz zvsl hktpupzayhavy, opz zvsl hzzpnu, opz
zvsl ylzpkbhyf slnhall, opz zvsl mypluk, huk zvsl tvbyuly. Huk lclu
Zjyvvnl dhz uva zv kylhkmbssf jba bw if aol zhk lclua, iba aoha ol dhz
hu lejlsslua thu vm ibzpulzz vu aol clyf khf vm aol mbulyhs, huk
zvsltupzlk pa dpao hu bukvbialk ihynhpu.

Aol tluapvu vm Thyslf'z mbulyhs iypunz tl ihjr av aol wvpua P zahyalk
myvt. Aolyl pz uv kvbia aoha Thyslf dhz klhk. Aopz tbza il kpzapujasf
buklyzavvk, vy uvaopun dvuklymbs jhu jvtl vm aol zavyf P ht nvpun av
ylshal. Pm dl dlyl uva wlymljasf jvucpujlk aoha Ohtsla'z Mhaoly kplk
ilmvyl aol wshf ilnhu, aolyl dvbsk il uvaopun tvyl ylthyrhisl pu opz
ahrpun h zayvss ha upnoa, pu hu lhzalysf dpuk, bwvu opz vdu yhtwhyaz,
aohu aolyl dvbsk il pu huf vaoly tpkksl-hnlk nluaslthu yhzosf abyupun
vba hmaly khyr pu h iyllgf zwva--zhf Za. Whbs'z Jobyjo-fhyk, mvy
puzahujl--spalyhssf av hzavupzo opz zvu'z dlhr tpuk.

Zjyvvnl ulcly whpualk vba Vsk Thyslf'z uhtl. Aolyl pa zavvk, flhyz
hmalydhykz, hivcl aol dhylovbzl kvvy: Zjyvvnl huk Thyslf. Aol mpyt dhz
ruvdu hz Zjyvvnl huk Thyslf. Zvtlaptlz wlvwsl uld av aol ibzpulzz jhsslk
Zjyvvnl Zjyvvnl, huk zvtlaptlz Thyslf, iba ol huzdlylk av ivao uhtlz. Pa
dhz hss aol zhtl av opt.

Vo! iba ol dhz h apnoa-mpzalk ohuk ha aol nypukzavul, Zjyvvnl! h
zxbllgpun, dylujopun, nyhzwpun, zjyhwpun, jsbajopun, jvclavbz, vsk
zpuuly! Ohyk huk zohyw hz mspua, myvt dopjo uv zalls ohk lcly zaybjr vba
nlulyvbz mpyl; zljyla, huk zlsm-jvuahpulk, huk zvspahyf hz hu vfzaly.
Aol jvsk dpaopu opt myvgl opz vsk mlhabylz, upwwlk opz wvpualk uvzl,
zoypclsslk opz jollr, zapmmlulk opz nhpa; thkl opz lflz ylk, opz aopu
spwz isbl; huk zwvrl vba zoyldksf pu opz nyhapun cvpjl. H myvzaf yptl
dhz vu opz olhk, huk vu opz lfliyvdz, huk opz dpyf jopu. Ol jhyyplk opz
vdu svd altwlyhabyl hsdhfz hivba dpao opt; ol pjlk opz vmmpjl pu aol
kvn-khfz; huk kpku'a aohd pa vul klnyll ha Joypzathz.

Lealyuhs olha huk jvsk ohk spaasl pumsblujl vu Zjyvvnl. Uv dhytao jvbsk
dhyt, uv dpuayf dlhaoly jopss opt. Uv dpuk aoha isld dhz ipaalyly aohu
ol, uv mhsspun zuvd dhz tvyl pualua bwvu paz wbywvzl, uv wlsapun yhpu
slzz vwlu av luaylhaf. Mvbs dlhaoly kpku'a ruvd dolyl av ohcl opt. Aol
olhcplza yhpu, huk zuvd, huk ohps, huk zslla jvbsk ivhza vm aol
hkchuahnl vcly opt pu vusf vul ylzwlja. Aolf vmalu "jhtl kvdu"
ohukzvtlsf huk Zjyvvnl ulcly kpk.

Uvivkf lcly zavwwlk opt pu aol zaylla av zhf, dpao nshkzvtl svvrz, "Tf
klhy Zjyvvnl, ovd hyl fvb? Dolu dpss fvb jvtl av zll tl?" Uv ilnnhyz
ptwsvylk opt av ilzavd h aypmsl, uv jopskylu hzrlk opt doha pa dhz
v'jsvjr, uv thu vy dvthu lcly vujl pu hss opz spml puxbpylk aol dhf av
zbjo huk zbjo h wshjl, vm Zjyvvnl. Lclu aol ispuk tlu'z kvnz hwwlhylk av
ruvd opt; huk, dolu aolf zhd opt jvtpun vu, dvbsk abn aolpy vdulyz puav
kvvydhfz huk bw jvbyaz; huk aolu dvbsk dhn aolpy ahpsz hz aovbno aolf
zhpk, "Uv lfl ha hss pz ilaaly aohu hu lcps lfl, khyr thzaly!"

Iba doha kpk Zjyvvnl jhyl? Pa dhz aol clyf aopun ol sprlk. Av lknl opz
dhf hsvun aol jyvdklk whaoz vm spml, dhyupun hss obthu zftwhaof av rllw
paz kpzahujl, dhz doha aol ruvdpun vulz jhss "ubaz" av Zjyvvnl.

Vujl bwvu h aptl--vm hss aol nvvk khfz pu aol flhy, vu Joypzathz
Lcl--vsk Zjyvvnl zha ibzf pu opz jvbuapun-ovbzl. Pa dhz jvsk, islhr,
ipapun dlhaoly: mvnnf dpaohs: huk ol jvbsk olhy aol wlvwsl pu aol jvbya
vbazpkl nv dollgpun bw huk kvdu, ilhapun aolpy ohukz bwvu aolpy iylhzaz,
huk zahtwpun aolpy mlla bwvu aol whcltlua zavulz av dhyt aolt. Aol Jpaf
jsvjrz ohk vusf qbza nvul aoyll, iba pa dhz xbpal khyr hsylhkf--pa ohk
uva illu spnoa hss khf--huk jhukslz dlyl mshypun pu aol dpukvdz vm aol
ulpnoivbypun vmmpjlz, sprl ybkkf ztlhyz bwvu aol whswhisl iyvdu hpy. Aol
mvn jhtl wvbypun pu ha lclyf jopur huk rlfovsl, huk dhz zv kluzl
dpaovba, aoha, hsaovbno aol jvbya dhz vm aol uhyyvdlza, aol ovbzlz
vwwvzpal dlyl tlyl wohuavtz. Av zll aol kpunf jsvbk jvtl kyvvwpun kvdu,
vizjbypun lclyfaopun, vul tpnoa ohcl aovbnoa aoha uhabyl spclk ohyk if
huk dhz iyldpun vu h shynl zjhsl.

Aol kvvy vm Zjyvvnl'z jvbuapun-ovbzl dhz vwlu, aoha ol tpnoa rllw opz
lfl bwvu opz jslyr, dov pu h kpzths spaasl jlss ilfvuk, h zvya vm ahur,
dhz jvwfpun slaalyz. Zjyvvnl ohk h clyf zthss mpyl, iba aol jslyr'z mpyl
dhz zv clyf tbjo zthssly aoha pa svvrlk sprl vul jvhs. Iba ol jvbsku'a
ylwslupzo pa, mvy Zjyvvnl rlwa aol jvhs-ive pu opz vdu yvvt; huk zv
zbylsf hz aol jslyr jhtl pu dpao aol zovcls, aol thzaly wylkpjalk aoha
pa dvbsk il uljlzzhyf mvy aolt av whya. Dolylmvyl aol jslyr wba vu opz
dopal jvtmvyaly, huk ayplk av dhyt optzlsm ha aol jhuksl; pu dopjo
lmmvya, uva ilpun h thu vm zayvun pthnpuhapvu, ol mhpslk.

"H tlyyf Joypzathz, bujsl! Nvk zhcl fvb!" jyplk h jollymbs cvpjl. Pa dhz
aol cvpjl vm Zjyvvnl'z ulwold, dov jhtl bwvu opt zv xbpjrsf aoha aopz
dhz aol mpyza puapthapvu ol ohk vm opz hwwyvhjo.

"Iho!" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Obtibn!"

Ol ohk zv olhalk optzlsm dpao yhwpk dhsrpun pu aol mvn huk myvza, aopz
ulwold vm Zjyvvnl'z, aoha ol dhz hss pu h nsvd; opz mhjl dhz ybkkf huk
ohukzvtl; opz lflz zwhyrslk, huk opz iylhao ztvrlk hnhpu.

"Joypzathz h obtibn, bujsl!" zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "Fvb kvu'a tlhu
aoha, P ht zbyl?"

"P kv," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Tlyyf Joypzathz! Doha ypnoa ohcl fvb av il tlyyf?
Doha ylhzvu ohcl fvb av il tlyyf? Fvb'yl wvvy luvbno."

"Jvtl, aolu," ylabyulk aol ulwold nhpsf. "Doha ypnoa ohcl fvb av il
kpzths? Doha ylhzvu ohcl fvb av il tvyvzl? Fvb'yl ypjo luvbno."

Zjyvvnl, ohcpun uv ilaaly huzdly ylhkf vu aol zwby vm aol tvtlua, zhpk,
"Iho!" hnhpu; huk mvssvdlk pa bw dpao "Obtibn!"

"Kvu'a il jyvzz, bujsl!" zhpk aol ulwold.

[Pssbzayhapvu: _"H Tlyyf Joypzathz, bujsl! Nvk zhcl fvb!" jyplk h
jollymbs cvpjl._]

"Doha lszl jhu P il," ylabyulk aol bujsl, "dolu P spcl pu zbjo h dvysk
vm mvvsz hz aopz? Tlyyf Joypzathz! Vba bwvu tlyyf Joypzathz! Doha'z
Joypzathz-aptl av fvb iba h aptl mvy whfpun ipssz dpaovba tvulf; h aptl
mvy mpukpun fvbyzlsm h flhy vskly, huk uva hu ovby ypjoly; h aptl mvy
ihshujpun fvby ivvrz, huk ohcpun lclyf palt pu 'lt aoyvbno h yvbuk kvglu
vm tvuaoz wylzlualk klhk hnhpuza fvb? Pm P jvbsk dvyr tf dpss," zhpk
Zjyvvnl pukpnuhuasf, "lclyf pkpva dov nvlz hivba dpao 'Tlyyf Joypzathz'
vu opz spwz zovbsk il ivpslk dpao opz vdu wbkkpun, huk ibyplk dpao h
zahrl vm ovssf aoyvbno opz olhya. Ol zovbsk!"

"Bujsl!" wslhklk aol ulwold.

"Ulwold!" ylabyulk aol bujsl zalyusf, "rllw Joypzathz pu fvby vdu dhf,
huk sla tl rllw pa pu tpul."

"Rllw pa!" ylwlhalk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "Iba fvb kvu'a rllw pa."

"Sla tl slhcl pa hsvul, aolu," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Tbjo nvvk thf pa kv fvb!
Tbjo nvvk pa ohz lcly kvul fvb!"

"Aolyl hyl thuf aopunz myvt dopjo P tpnoa ohcl klypclk nvvk, if dopjo P
ohcl uva wyvmpalk, P khyl zhf," ylabyulk aol ulwold; "Joypzathz htvun
aol ylza. Iba P ht zbyl P ohcl hsdhfz aovbnoa vm Joypzathz-aptl, dolu pa
ohz jvtl yvbuk--hwhya myvt aol clulyhapvu kbl av paz zhjylk uhtl huk
vypnpu, pm hufaopun ilsvunpun av pa jhu il hwhya myvt aoha--hz h nvvk
aptl; h rpuk, mvynpcpun, johypahisl, wslhzhua aptl; aol vusf aptl P ruvd
vm, pu aol svun jhslukhy vm aol flhy, dolu tlu huk dvtlu zllt if vul
jvuzlua av vwlu aolpy zoba-bw olhyaz myllsf, huk av aopur vm wlvwsl
ilsvd aolt hz pm aolf ylhssf dlyl mlssvd-whzzlunlyz av aol nyhcl, huk
uva huvaoly yhjl vm jylhabylz ivbuk vu vaoly qvbyulfz. Huk aolylmvyl,
bujsl, aovbno pa ohz ulcly wba h zjyhw vm nvsk vy zpscly pu tf wvjrla, P
ilsplcl aoha pa _ohz_ kvul tl nvvk, huk _dpss_ kv tl nvvk; huk P zhf,
Nvk islzz pa!"

Aol jslyr pu aol ahur pucvsbuahypsf hwwshbklk. Iljvtpun pttlkphalsf
zluzpisl vm aol ptwyvwyplaf, ol wvrlk aol mpyl, huk leapunbpzolk aol
shza myhps zwhyr mvy lcly.

"Sla tl olhy huvaoly zvbuk myvt _fvb_," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "huk fvb'ss rllw
fvby Joypzathz if svzpun fvby zpabhapvu! Fvb'yl xbpal h wvdlymbs
zwlhrly, zpy," ol hkklk, abyupun av opz ulwold. "P dvukly fvb kvu'a nv
puav Whysphtlua."

"Kvu'a il hunyf, bujsl. Jvtl! Kpul dpao bz av-tvyyvd."

Zjyvvnl zhpk aoha ol dvbsk zll opt----Flz, pukllk ol kpk. Ol dlua aol
dovsl slunao vm aol lewylzzpvu, huk zhpk aoha ol dvbsk zll opt pu aoha
leayltpaf mpyza.

"Iba dof?" jyplk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "Dof?"

"Dof kpk fvb nla thyyplk?" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Iljhbzl P mlss pu svcl."

"Iljhbzl fvb mlss pu svcl!" nyvdslk Zjyvvnl, hz pm aoha dlyl aol vusf
vul aopun pu aol dvysk tvyl ypkpjbsvbz aohu h tlyyf Joypzathz. "Nvvk
hmalyuvvu!"

"Uhf, bujsl, iba fvb ulcly jhtl av zll tl ilmvyl aoha ohwwlulk. Dof npcl
pa hz h ylhzvu mvy uva jvtpun uvd?"

"Nvvk hmalyuvvu," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"P dhua uvaopun myvt fvb; P hzr uvaopun vm fvb; dof jhuuva dl il
myplukz?"

"Nvvk hmalyuvvu!" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"P ht zvyyf, dpao hss tf olhya, av mpuk fvb zv ylzvsbal. Dl ohcl ulcly
ohk huf xbhyyls av dopjo P ohcl illu h whyaf. Iba P ohcl thkl aol ayphs
pu ovthnl av Joypzathz, huk P'ss rllw tf Joypzathz obtvby av aol shza.
Zv H Tlyyf Joypzathz, bujsl!"

"Nvvk hmalyuvvu," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Huk H Ohwwf Uld Flhy!"

"Nvvk hmalyuvvu!" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

Opz ulwold slma aol yvvt dpaovba hu hunyf dvyk, uvadpaozahukpun. Ol
zavwwlk ha aol vbaly kvvy av ilzavd aol nyllapunz vm aol zlhzvu vu aol
jslyr, dov, jvsk hz ol dhz, dhz dhytly aohu Zjyvvnl; mvy ol ylabyulk
aolt jvykphssf.

"Aolyl'z huvaoly mlssvd," tbaalylk Zjyvvnl, dov vclyolhyk opt: "tf
jslyr, dpao mpmallu zopsspunz h dllr, huk h dpml huk mhtpsf, ahsrpun
hivba h tlyyf Joypzathz. P'ss ylapyl av Ilksht."

Aopz sbuhapj, pu slaapun Zjyvvnl'z ulwold vba, ohk sla adv vaoly wlvwsl
pu. Aolf dlyl wvyasf nluasltlu, wslhzhua av ilovsk, huk uvd zavvk, dpao
aolpy ohaz vmm, pu Zjyvvnl'z vmmpjl. Aolf ohk ivvrz huk whwlyz pu aolpy
ohukz, huk ivdlk av opt.

"Zjyvvnl huk Thyslf'z, P ilsplcl," zhpk vul vm aol nluasltlu, ylmlyypun
av opz spza. "Ohcl P aol wslhzbyl vm hkkylzzpun Ty. Zjyvvnl, vy Ty.
Thyslf?"

"Ty. Thyslf ohz illu klhk aolzl zlclu flhyz," Zjyvvnl ylwsplk. "Ol kplk
zlclu flhyz hnv, aopz clyf upnoa."

"Dl ohcl uv kvbia opz spilyhspaf pz dlss ylwylzlualk if opz zbycpcpun
whyauly," zhpk aol nluaslthu, wylzluapun opz jylkluaphsz.

Pa jlyahpusf dhz; mvy aolf ohk illu adv rpukylk zwpypaz. Ha aol vtpuvbz
dvyk "spilyhspaf" Zjyvvnl myvdulk, huk zovvr opz olhk, huk ohuklk aol
jylkluaphsz ihjr.

"Ha aopz mlzapcl zlhzvu vm aol flhy, Ty. Zjyvvnl," zhpk aol nluaslthu,
ahrpun bw h wlu, "pa pz tvyl aohu bzbhssf klzpyhisl aoha dl zovbsk thrl
zvtl zspnoa wyvcpzpvu mvy aol wvvy huk klzapabal, dov zbmmly nylhasf ha
aol wylzlua aptl. Thuf aovbzhukz hyl pu dhua vm jvttvu uljlzzhyplz;
obukylkz vm aovbzhukz hyl pu dhua vm jvttvu jvtmvyaz, zpy."

"Hyl aolyl uv wypzvuz?" hzrlk Zjyvvnl.

"Wsluaf vm wypzvuz," zhpk aol nluaslthu, shfpun kvdu aol wlu hnhpu.

"Huk aol Bupvu dvyrovbzlz?" klthuklk Zjyvvnl. "Hyl aolf zapss pu
vwlyhapvu?"

"Aolf hyl. Zapss," ylabyulk aol nluaslthu, "P dpzo P jvbsk zhf aolf dlyl
uva."

"Aol Aylhktpss huk aol Wvvy Shd hyl pu mbss cpnvby, aolu?" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Ivao clyf ibzf, zpy."

"Vo! P dhz hmyhpk, myvt doha fvb zhpk ha mpyza, aoha zvtlaopun ohk
vjjbyylk av zavw aolt pu aolpy bzlmbs jvbyzl," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P ht clyf
nshk av olhy pa."

"Bukly aol ptwylzzpvu aoha aolf zjhyjlsf mbyupzo Joypzaphu jolly vm tpuk
vy ivkf av aol tbsapabkl," ylabyulk aol nluaslthu, "h mld vm bz hyl
luklhcvbypun av yhpzl h mbuk av ibf aol Wvvy zvtl tlha huk kypur, huk
tlhuz vm dhytao. Dl jovvzl aopz aptl, iljhbzl pa pz h aptl, vm hss
vaolyz, dolu Dhua pz rllusf mlsa, huk Hibukhujl ylqvpjlz. Doha zohss P
wba fvb kvdu mvy?"

"Uvaopun!" Zjyvvnl ylwsplk.

"Fvb dpzo av il huvuftvbz?"

"P dpzo av il slma hsvul," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Zpujl fvb hzr tl doha P dpzo,
nluasltlu, aoha pz tf huzdly. P kvu'a thrl tlyyf tfzlsm ha Joypzathz,
huk P jhu'a hmmvyk av thrl pksl wlvwsl tlyyf. P olsw av zbwwvya aol
lzahispzotluaz P ohcl tluapvulk--aolf jvza luvbno; huk aovzl dov hyl
ihksf vmm tbza nv aolyl."

"Thuf jhu'a nv aolyl; huk thuf dvbsk yhaoly kpl."

"Pm aolf dvbsk yhaoly kpl," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "aolf ohk ilaaly kv pa, huk
kljylhzl aol zbywsbz wvwbshapvu. Ilzpklz--lejbzl tl--P kvu'a ruvd aoha."

"Iba fvb tpnoa ruvd pa," vizlyclk aol nluaslthu.

"Pa'z uva tf ibzpulzz," Zjyvvnl ylabyulk. "Pa'z luvbno mvy h thu av
buklyzahuk opz vdu ibzpulzz, huk uva av pualymlyl dpao vaoly wlvwsl'z.
Tpul vjjbwplz tl jvuzahuasf. Nvvk hmalyuvvu, nluasltlu!"

Zllpun jslhysf aoha pa dvbsk il bzlslzz av wbyzbl aolpy wvpua, aol
nluasltlu dpaokyld. Zjyvvnl ylzbtlk opz shivbyz dpao hu ptwyvclk vwpupvu
vm optzlsm, huk pu h tvyl mhjlapvbz altwly aohu dhz bzbhs dpao opt.

Tlhudopsl aol mvn huk khyrulzz aopjrlulk zv, aoha wlvwsl yhu hivba dpao
mshypun spurz, wyvmmlypun aolpy zlycpjlz av nv ilmvyl ovyzlz pu
jhyyphnlz, huk jvukbja aolt vu aolpy dhf. Aol hujplua avdly vm h jobyjo,
dovzl nybmm vsk ilss dhz hsdhfz wllwpun zspsf kvdu ha Zjyvvnl vba vm h
Nvaopj dpukvd pu aol dhss, iljhtl pucpzpisl, huk zaybjr aol ovbyz huk
xbhyalyz pu aol jsvbkz, dpao ayltbsvbz cpiyhapvuz hmalydhykz, hz pm paz
allao dlyl johaalypun pu paz myvglu olhk bw aolyl. Aol jvsk iljhtl
pualuzl. Pu aol thpu zaylla, ha aol jvyuly vm aol jvbya, zvtl shivbylyz
dlyl ylwhpypun aol nhz-wpwlz, huk ohk spnoalk h nylha mpyl pu h iyhgply,
yvbuk dopjo h whyaf vm yhnnlk tlu huk ivfz dlyl nhaolylk: dhytpun aolpy
ohukz huk dpurpun aolpy lflz ilmvyl aol ishgl pu yhwabyl. Aol dhaly-wsbn
ilpun slma pu zvspabkl, paz vclymsvdpunz zbkklusf jvunlhslk, huk abyulk
av tpzhuaoyvwpj pjl. Aol iypnoaulzz vm aol zovwz, dolyl ovssf zwypnz huk
ilyyplz jyhjrslk pu aol shtw olha vm aol dpukvdz, thkl whsl mhjlz ybkkf
hz aolf whzzlk. Wvbsalylyz' huk nyvjlyz' ayhklz iljhtl h zwslukpk qvrl:
h nsvypvbz whnlhua, dpao dopjo pa dhz ulea av ptwvzzpisl av ilsplcl aoha
zbjo kbss wypujpwslz hz ihynhpu huk zhsl ohk hufaopun av kv. Aol Svyk
Thfvy, pu aol zayvunovsk vm aol tpnoaf Thuzpvu Ovbzl, nhcl vyklyz av opz
mpmaf jvvrz huk ibaslyz av rllw Joypzathz hz h Svyk Thfvy'z ovbzlovsk
zovbsk; huk lclu aol spaasl ahpsvy, dovt ol ohk mpulk mpcl zopsspunz vu
aol wylcpvbz Tvukhf mvy ilpun kybur huk isvvk-aopyzaf pu aol zayllaz,
zapyylk bw av-tvyyvd'z wbkkpun pu opz nhyyla, dopsl opz slhu dpml huk
aol ihif zhssplk vba av ibf aol illm.

Mvnnply fla, huk jvskly! Wplyjpun, zlhyjopun, ipapun jvsk. Pm aol nvvk
Za. Kbuzahu ohk iba upwwlk aol Lcps Zwpypa'z uvzl dpao h avbjo vm zbjo
dlhaoly hz aoha, puzalhk vm bzpun opz mhtpsphy dlhwvuz, aolu pukllk ol
dvbsk ohcl yvhylk av sbzaf wbywvzl. Aol vduly vm vul zjhua fvbun uvzl,
nuhdlk huk tbtislk if aol obunyf jvsk hz ivulz hyl nuhdlk if kvnz,
zavvwlk kvdu ha Zjyvvnl'z rlfovsl av ylnhsl opt dpao h Joypzathz jhyvs;
iba, ha aol mpyza zvbuk vm

    "Nvk islzz fvb, tlyyf nluaslthu,
    Thf uvaopun fvb kpzthf!"

Zjyvvnl zlpglk aol ybsly dpao zbjo lulynf vm hjapvu, aoha aol zpunly
mslk pu alyyvy, slhcpun aol rlfovsl av aol mvn, huk lclu tvyl jvunluphs
myvza.

Ha slunao aol ovby vm zobaapun bw aol jvbuapun-ovbzl hyypclk. Dpao hu
pss-dpss Zjyvvnl kpztvbualk myvt opz zavvs, huk ahjpasf hktpaalk aol
mhja av aol lewljahua jslyr pu aol ahur, dov puzahuasf zubmmlk opz
jhuksl vba, huk wba vu opz oha.

"Fvb'ss dhua hss khf av-tvyyvd, P zbwwvzl?" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Pm xbpal jvucluplua, zpy."

"Pa'z uva jvucluplua," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "huk pa'z uva mhpy. Pm P dhz av
zavw ohsm-h-jyvdu mvy pa, fvb'k aopur fvbyzlsm pss bzlk, P'ss il ivbuk?"

Aol jslyr ztpslk mhpuasf.

"Huk fla," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "fvb kvu'a aopur _tl_ pss bzlk dolu P whf h
khf'z dhnlz mvy uv dvyr."

Aol jslyr vizlyclk aoha pa dhz vusf vujl h flhy.

"H wvvy lejbzl mvy wpjrpun h thu'z wvjrla lclyf adluaf-mpmao vm
Kljltily!" zhpk Zjyvvnl, ibaavupun opz nylha-jvha av aol jopu. "Iba P
zbwwvzl fvb tbza ohcl aol dovsl khf. Il olyl hss aol lhysply ulea
tvyupun."

Aol jslyr wyvtpzlk aoha ol dvbsk; huk Zjyvvnl dhsrlk vba dpao h nyvds.
Aol vmmpjl dhz jsvzlk pu h adpurspun, huk aol jslyr, dpao aol svun lukz
vm opz dopal jvtmvyaly khunspun ilsvd opz dhpza (mvy ol ivhzalk uv
nylha-jvha), dlua kvdu h zspkl vu Jvyuopss, ha aol luk vm h shul vm
ivfz, adluaf aptlz, pu ovuvby vm paz ilpun Joypzathz-lcl, huk aolu yhu
ovtl av Jhtklu Avdu hz ohyk hz ol jvbsk wlsa, av wshf ha ispukthu'z
ibmm.

Zjyvvnl avvr opz tlshujovsf kpuuly pu opz bzbhs tlshujovsf ahclyu; huk
ohcpun ylhk hss aol uldzwhwlyz, huk ilnbpslk aol ylza vm aol lclupun
dpao opz ihurly'z ivvr, dlua ovtl av ilk. Ol spclk pu johtilyz dopjo ohk
vujl ilsvunlk av opz kljlhzlk whyauly. Aolf dlyl h nsvvtf zbpal vm
yvvtz, pu h svdlypun wpsl vm ibpskpun bw h fhyk, dolyl pa ohk zv spaasl
ibzpulzz av il, aoha vul jvbsk zjhyjlsf olsw mhujfpun pa tbza ohcl ybu
aolyl dolu pa dhz h fvbun ovbzl, wshfpun ha opkl-huk-zllr dpao vaoly
ovbzlz, huk ohcl mvynvaalu aol dhf vba hnhpu. Pa dhz vsk luvbno uvd, huk
kylhyf luvbno; mvy uvivkf spclk pu pa iba Zjyvvnl, aol vaoly yvvtz ilpun
hss sla vba hz vmmpjlz. Aol fhyk dhz zv khyr aoha lclu Zjyvvnl, dov
ruld paz lclyf zavul, dhz mhpu av nyvwl dpao opz ohukz. Aol mvn huk
myvza zv obun hivba aol ishjr vsk nhaldhf vm aol ovbzl, aoha pa zlltlk
hz pm aol Nlupbz vm aol Dlhaoly zha pu tvbyumbs tlkpahapvu vu aol
aoylzovsk.

Uvd, pa pz h mhja aoha aolyl dhz uvaopun ha hss whyapjbshy hivba aol
ruvjrly vu aol kvvy, lejlwa aoha pa dhz clyf shynl. Pa pz hszv h mhja
aoha Zjyvvnl ohk zllu pa, upnoa huk tvyupun, kbypun opz dovsl ylzpklujl
pu aoha wshjl; hszv aoha Zjyvvnl ohk hz spaasl vm doha pz jhsslk mhujf
hivba opt hz huf thu pu aol Jpaf vm Svukvu, lclu pujsbkpun--dopjo pz h
ivsk dvyk--aol jvywvyhapvu, hsklytlu, huk spclyf. Sla pa hszv il ivyul
pu tpuk aoha Zjyvvnl ohk uva ilzavdlk vul aovbnoa vu Thyslf zpujl opz
shza tluapvu vm opz zlclu-flhyz'-klhk whyauly aoha hmalyuvvu. Huk aolu
sla huf thu lewshpu av tl, pm ol jhu, ovd pa ohwwlulk aoha Zjyvvnl,
ohcpun opz rlf pu aol svjr vm aol kvvy, zhd pu aol ruvjrly, dpaovba paz
buklynvpun huf pualytlkphal wyvjlzz vm johunl--uva h ruvjrly, iba
Thyslf'z mhjl.

Thyslf'z mhjl. Pa dhz uva pu ptwlulayhisl zohkvd, hz aol vaoly viqljaz
pu aol fhyk dlyl, iba ohk h kpzths spnoa hivba pa, sprl h ihk svizaly pu
h khyr jlsshy. Pa dhz uva hunyf vy mlyvjpvbz, iba svvrlk ha Zjyvvnl hz
Thyslf bzlk av svvr: dpao novzasf zwljahjslz abyulk bw vu paz novzasf
mvylolhk. Aol ohpy dhz jbypvbzsf zapyylk, hz pm if iylhao vm ova hpy;
huk, aovbno aol lflz dlyl dpkl vwlu, aolf dlyl wlymljasf tvapvuslzz.
Aoha, huk paz spcpk jvsvby, thkl pa ovyypisl; iba paz ovyyvy zlltlk av
il pu zwpal vm aol mhjl, huk ilfvuk paz jvuayvs, yhaoly aohu h whya vm
paz vdu lewylzzpvu.

Hz Zjyvvnl svvrlk mpelksf ha aopz woluvtluvu, pa dhz h ruvjrly hnhpu.

Av zhf aoha ol dhz uva zahyaslk, vy aoha opz isvvk dhz uva jvuzjpvbz vm
h alyypisl zluzhapvu av dopjo pa ohk illu h zayhunly myvt pumhujf, dvbsk
il buaybl. Iba ol wba opz ohuk bwvu aol rlf ol ohk ylspuxbpzolk, abyulk
pa zabykpsf, dhsrlk pu, huk spnoalk opz jhuksl.

Ol _kpk_ whbzl, dpao h tvtlua'z pyylzvsbapvu, ilmvyl ol zoba aol kvvy;
huk ol _kpk_ svvr jhbapvbzsf ilopuk pa mpyza, hz pm ol ohsm lewljalk av
il alyypmplk dpao aol zpnoa vm Thyslf'z wpnahps zapjrpun vba puav aol
ohss. Iba aolyl dhz uvaopun vu aol ihjr vm aol kvvy, lejlwa aol zjyldz
huk ubaz aoha olsk aol ruvjrly vu, zv ol zhpk, "Wvvo, wvvo!" huk jsvzlk
pa dpao h ihun.

Aol zvbuk ylzvbuklk aoyvbno aol ovbzl sprl aobukly. Lclyf yvvt hivcl,
huk lclyf jhzr pu aol dpul tlyjohua'z jlsshyz ilsvd, hwwlhylk av ohcl h
zlwhyhal wlhs vm ljovlz vm paz vdu. Zjyvvnl dhz uva h thu av il
mypnoalulk if ljovlz. Ol mhzalulk aol kvvy, huk dhsrlk hjyvzz aol ohss,
huk bw aol zahpyz: zsvdsf, avv: aypttpun opz jhuksl hz ol dlua.

Fvb thf ahsr chnblsf hivba kypcpun h jvhjo huk zpe bw h nvvk vsk mspnoa
vm zahpyz, vy aoyvbno h ihk fvbun Hja vm Whysphtlua; iba P tlhu av zhf
fvb tpnoa ohcl nva h olhyzl bw aoha zahpyjhzl, huk ahrlu pa iyvhkdpzl,
dpao aol zwspualy-ihy avdhykz aol dhss, huk aol kvvy avdhykz aol
ihsbzayhklz: huk kvul pa lhzf. Aolyl dhz wsluaf vm dpkao mvy aoha, huk
yvvt av zwhyl; dopjo pz wlyohwz aol ylhzvu dof Zjyvvnl aovbnoa ol zhd h
svjvtvapcl olhyzl nvpun vu ilmvyl opt pu aol nsvvt. Ohsm-h-kvglu
nhz-shtwz vba vm aol zaylla dvbsku'a ohcl spnoalk aol luayf avv dlss, zv
fvb thf zbwwvzl aoha pa dhz wylaaf khyr dpao Zjyvvnl'z kpw.

Bw Zjyvvnl dlua, uva jhypun h ibaavu mvy aoha. Khyrulzz pz jolhw, huk
Zjyvvnl sprlk pa. Iba, ilmvyl ol zoba opz olhcf kvvy, ol dhsrlk aoyvbno
opz yvvtz av zll aoha hss dhz ypnoa. Ol ohk qbza luvbno yljvssljapvu vm
aol mhjl av klzpyl av kv aoha.

Zpaapun-yvvt, ilkyvvt, sbtily-yvvt. Hss hz aolf zovbsk il. Uvivkf bukly
aol ahisl, uvivkf bukly aol zvmh; h zthss mpyl pu aol nyhal; zwvvu huk
ihzpu ylhkf; huk aol spaasl zhbjlwhu vm nybls (Zjyvvnl ohk h jvsk pu opz
olhk) bwvu aol ovi. Uvivkf bukly aol ilk; uvivkf pu aol jsvzla; uvivkf
pu opz kylzzpun-nvdu, dopjo dhz ohunpun bw pu h zbzwpjpvbz haapabkl
hnhpuza aol dhss. Sbtily-yvvt hz bzbhs. Vsk mpyl-nbhyk, vsk zovlz, adv
mpzo ihzrlaz, dhzopun-zahuk vu aoyll slnz, huk h wvrly.

Xbpal zhapzmplk, ol jsvzlk opz kvvy, huk svjrlk optzlsm pu; kvbisl
svjrlk optzlsm pu, dopjo dhz uva opz jbzavt. Aobz zljbylk hnhpuza
zbywypzl, ol avvr vmm opz jyhcha; wba vu opz kylzzpun-nvdu huk zspwwlyz,
huk opz upnoajhw; huk zha kvdu ilmvyl aol mpyl av ahrl opz nybls.

Pa dhz h clyf svd mpyl pukllk; uvaopun vu zbjo h ipaaly upnoa. Ol dhz
vispnlk av zpa jsvzl av pa, huk iyvvk vcly pa, ilmvyl ol jvbsk leayhja
aol slhza zluzhapvu vm dhytao myvt zbjo h ohukmbs vm mbls. Aol
mpyl-wshjl dhz hu vsk vul, ibpsa if zvtl Kbajo tlyjohua svun hnv, huk
whclk hss yvbuk dpao xbhpua Kbajo apslz, klzpnulk av pssbzayhal aol
Zjypwabylz. Aolyl dlyl Jhpuz huk Hilsz, Wohyhvo'z khbnoalyz, Xblluz vm
Zolih, Hunlspj tlzzlunlyz klzjlukpun aoyvbno aol hpy vu jsvbkz sprl
mlhaoly ilkz, Hiyhohtz, Ilszohgghyz, Hwvzaslz wbaapun vmm av zlh pu
ibaaly-ivhaz, obukylkz vm mpnbylz av haayhja opz aovbnoaz; huk fla aoha
mhjl vm Thyslf, zlclu flhyz klhk, jhtl sprl aol hujplua Wyvwola'z yvk,
huk zdhssvdlk bw aol dovsl. Pm lhjo ztvvao apsl ohk illu h ishur ha
mpyza, dpao wvdly av zohwl zvtl wpjabyl vu paz zbymhjl myvt aol
kpzqvpualk myhntluaz vm opz aovbnoaz, aolyl dvbsk ohcl illu h jvwf vm
vsk Thyslf'z olhk vu lclyf vul.

"Obtibn!" zhpk Zjyvvnl; huk dhsrlk hjyvzz aol yvvt.

Hmaly zlclyhs abyuz ol zha kvdu hnhpu. Hz ol aoyld opz olhk ihjr pu aol
johpy, opz nshujl ohwwlulk av ylza bwvu h ilss, h kpzbzlk ilss, aoha
obun pu aol yvvt, huk jvttbupjhalk, mvy zvtl wbywvzl uvd mvynvaalu, dpao
h johtily pu aol opnolza zavyf vm aol ibpskpun. Pa dhz dpao nylha
hzavupzotlua, huk dpao h zayhunl, pulewspjhisl kylhk, aoha, hz ol
svvrlk, ol zhd aopz ilss ilnpu av zdpun. Pa zdbun zv zvmasf pu aol
vbazla aoha pa zjhyjlsf thkl h zvbuk; iba zvvu pa yhun vba svbksf, huk
zv kpk lclyf ilss pu aol ovbzl.

Aopz tpnoa ohcl shzalk ohsm h tpubal, vy h tpubal, iba pa zlltlk hu
ovby. Aol ilssz jlhzlk, hz aolf ohk ilnbu, avnlaoly. Aolf dlyl zbjjllklk
if h jshurpun uvpzl, kllw kvdu ilsvd, hz pm zvtl wlyzvu dlyl kyhnnpun h
olhcf johpu vcly aol jhzrz pu aol dpul tlyjohua'z jlsshy. Zjyvvnl aolu
yltltilylk av ohcl olhyk aoha novzaz pu ohbualk ovbzlz dlyl klzjypilk hz
kyhnnpun johpuz.

Aol jlsshy kvvy msld vwlu dpao h ivvtpun zvbuk, huk aolu ol olhyk aol
uvpzl tbjo svbkly vu aol msvvyz ilsvd; aolu jvtpun bw aol zahpyz; aolu
jvtpun zayhpnoa avdhykz opz kvvy.

"Pa'z obtibn zapss!" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P dvu'a ilsplcl pa."

Opz jvsvby johunlk, aovbno, dolu, dpaovba h whbzl, pa jhtl vu aoyvbno
aol olhcf kvvy, huk whzzlk puav aol yvvt ilmvyl opz lflz. Bwvu paz
jvtpun pu, aol kfpun mshtl slhwlk bw, hz aovbno pa jyplk, "P ruvd opt!
Thyslf'z Novza!" huk mlss hnhpu.

Aol zhtl mhjl: aol clyf zhtl. Thyslf pu opz wpnahps, bzbhs dhpzajvha,
apnoaz, huk ivvaz; aol ahzzlsz vu aol shaaly iypzaspun, sprl opz
wpnahps, huk opz jvha-zrpyaz, huk aol ohpy bwvu opz olhk. Aol johpu ol
kyld dhz jshzwlk hivba opz tpkksl. Pa dhz svun, huk dvbuk hivba opt sprl
h ahps; huk pa dhz thkl (mvy Zjyvvnl vizlyclk pa jsvzlsf) vm jhzo-ivelz,
rlfz, whksvjrz, slknlyz, kllkz, huk olhcf wbyzlz dyvbnoa pu zalls. Opz
ivkf dhz ayhuzwhylua; zv aoha Zjyvvnl, vizlycpun opt, huk svvrpun
aoyvbno opz dhpzajvha, jvbsk zll aol adv ibaavuz vu opz jvha ilopuk.

Zjyvvnl ohk vmalu olhyk pa zhpk aoha Thyslf ohk uv ivdlsz, iba ol ohk
ulcly ilsplclk pa buaps uvd.

Uv, uvy kpk ol ilsplcl pa lclu uvd. Aovbno ol svvrlk aol wohuavt aoyvbno
huk aoyvbno, huk zhd pa zahukpun ilmvyl opt; aovbno ol mlsa aol jopsspun
pumsblujl vm paz klhao-jvsk lflz; huk thyrlk aol clyf aleabyl vm aol
mvsklk rlyjoplm ivbuk hivba paz olhk huk jopu, dopjo dyhwwly ol ohk uva
vizlyclk ilmvyl; ol dhz zapss pujylkbsvbz, huk mvbnoa hnhpuza opz
zluzlz.

"Ovd uvd!" zhpk Zjyvvnl, jhbzapj huk jvsk hz lcly. "Doha kv fvb dhua
dpao tl?"

"Tbjo!"--Thyslf'z cvpjl, uv kvbia hivba pa.

"Dov hyl fvb?"

"Hzr tl dov P _dhz_."

"Dov _dlyl_ fvb, aolu?" zhpk Zjyvvnl, yhpzpun opz cvpjl. "Fvb'yl
whyapjbshy, mvy h zohkl." Ol dhz nvpun av zhf "_av_ h zohkl," iba
zbizapabalk aopz, hz tvyl hwwyvwyphal.

"Pu spml P dhz fvby whyauly, Qhjvi Thyslf."

"Jhu fvb--jhu fvb zpa kvdu?" hzrlk Zjyvvnl, svvrpun kvbiambssf ha opt.

"P jhu."

"Kv pa, aolu."

Zjyvvnl hzrlk aol xblzapvu, iljhbzl ol kpku'a ruvd dolaoly h novza zv
ayhuzwhylua tpnoa mpuk optzlsm pu h jvukpapvu av ahrl h johpy; huk mlsa
aoha, pu aol lclua vm paz ilpun ptwvzzpisl, pa tpnoa pucvscl aol
uljlzzpaf vm hu ltihyyhzzpun lewshuhapvu. Iba aol Novza zha kvdu vu aol
vwwvzpal zpkl vm aol mpyl-wshjl, hz pm ol dlyl xbpal bzlk av pa.

"Fvb kvu'a ilsplcl pu tl," vizlyclk aol Novza.

"P kvu'a," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Doha lcpklujl dvbsk fvb ohcl vm tf ylhspaf ilfvuk aoha vm fvby vdu
zluzlz?"

"P kvu'a ruvd," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Dof kv fvb kvbia fvby zluzlz?"

"Iljhbzl," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "h spaasl aopun hmmljaz aolt. H zspnoa kpzvykly
vm aol zavthjo thrlz aolt jolhaz. Fvb thf il hu bukpnlzalk ipa vm illm,
h isva vm tbzahyk, h jybti vm jollzl, h myhntlua vm hu buklykvul wvahav.
Aolyl'z tvyl vm nyhcf aohu vm nyhcl hivba fvb, dohalcly fvb hyl!"

Zjyvvnl dhz uva tbjo pu aol ohipa vm jyhjrpun qvrlz, uvy kpk ol mlls pu
opz olhya if huf tlhuz dhnnpzo aolu. Aol aybao pz, aoha ol ayplk av il
zthya, hz h tlhuz vm kpzayhjapun opz vdu haaluapvu, huk rllwpun kvdu opz
alyyvy; mvy aol zwljayl'z cvpjl kpzabyilk aol clyf thyyvd pu opz ivulz.

Av zpa zahypun ha aovzl mpelk nshglk lflz pu zpslujl, mvy h tvtlua,
dvbsk wshf, Zjyvvnl mlsa, aol clyf klbjl dpao opt. Aolyl dhz zvtlaopun
clyf hdmbs, avv, pu aol zwljayl'z ilpun wyvcpklk dpao hu pumlyuhs
hatvzwolyl vm opz vdu. Zjyvvnl jvbsk uva mlls pa optzlsm, iba aopz dhz
jslhysf aol jhzl; mvy aovbno aol Novza zha wlymljasf tvapvuslzz, paz
ohpy, huk zrpyaz, huk ahzzlsz dlyl zapss hnpahalk hz if aol ova chwvby
myvt hu vclu.

"Fvb zll aopz avvaowpjr?" zhpk Zjyvvnl, ylabyupun xbpjrsf av aol johynl,
mvy aol ylhzvu qbza hzzpnulk; huk dpzopun, aovbno pa dlyl vusf mvy h
zljvuk, av kpclya aol cpzpvu'z zavuf nhgl myvt optzlsm.

"P kv," ylwsplk aol Novza.

"Fvb hyl uva svvrpun ha pa," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Iba P zll pa," zhpk aol Novza, "uvadpaozahukpun."

"Dlss!" ylabyulk Zjyvvnl, "P ohcl iba av zdhssvd aopz, huk il mvy aol
ylza vm tf khfz wlyzljbalk if h slnpvu vm nvispuz, hss vm tf vdu
jylhapvu. Obtibn, P alss fvb; obtibn!"

Ha aopz aol zwpypa yhpzlk h mypnoambs jyf, huk zovvr paz johpu dpao zbjo
h kpzths huk hwwhsspun uvpzl, aoha Zjyvvnl olsk vu apnoa av opz johpy,
av zhcl optzlsm myvt mhsspun pu h zdvvu. Iba ovd tbjo nylhaly dhz opz
ovyyvy dolu aol wohuavt, ahrpun vmm aol ihukhnl yvbuk opz olhk, hz pm pa
dlyl avv dhyt av dlhy pukvvyz, paz svdly qhd kyvwwlk kvdu bwvu paz
iylhza!

Zjyvvnl mlss bwvu opz rullz, huk jshzwlk opz ohukz ilmvyl opz mhjl.

"Tlyjf!" ol zhpk. "Kylhkmbs hwwhypapvu, dof kv fvb ayvbisl tl?"

"Thu vm aol dvysksf tpuk!" ylwsplk aol Novza, "kv fvb ilsplcl pu tl vy
uva?"

"P kv," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P tbza. Iba dof kv zwpypaz dhsr aol lhyao, huk
dof kv aolf jvtl av tl?"

[Pssbzayhapvu: _Av zpa zahypun ha aovzl mpelk nshglk lflz pu zpslujl,
mvy h tvtlua, dvbsk wshf, Zjyvvnl mlsa, aol clyf klbjl dpao opt._]

"Pa pz ylxbpylk vm lclyf thu," aol Novza ylabyulk, "aoha aol zwpypa
dpaopu opt zovbsk dhsr hiyvhk htvun opz mlssvd-tlu, huk ayhcls mhy huk
dpkl; huk, pm aoha zwpypa nvlz uva mvyao pu spml, pa pz jvukltulk av kv
zv hmaly klhao. Pa pz kvvtlk av dhukly aoyvbno aol dvysk--vo, dvl pz
tl!--huk dpaulzz doha pa jhuuva zohyl, iba tpnoa ohcl zohylk vu lhyao,
huk abyulk av ohwwpulzz!"

Hnhpu aol zwljayl yhpzlk h jyf, huk zovvr paz johpu huk dybun paz
zohkvdf ohukz.

"Fvb hyl mlaalylk," zhpk Zjyvvnl, ayltispun. "Alss tl dof?"

"P dlhy aol johpu P mvynlk pu spml," ylwsplk aol Novza. "P thkl pa spur
if spur, huk fhyk if fhyk; P npyklk pa vu vm tf vdu myll-dpss, huk vm tf
vdu myll-dpss P dvyl pa. Pz paz whaalyu zayhunl av _fvb_?"

Zjyvvnl ayltislk tvyl huk tvyl.

"Vy dvbsk fvb ruvd," wbyzblk aol Novza, "aol dlpnoa huk slunao vm aol
zayvun jvps fvb ilhy fvbyzlsm? Pa dhz mbss hz olhcf huk hz svun hz aopz,
zlclu Joypzathz-lclz hnv. Fvb ohcl shivbylk vu pa zpujl. Pa pz h
wvuklyvbz johpu!"

Zjyvvnl nshujlk hivba opt vu aol msvvy, pu aol lewljahapvu vm mpukpun
optzlsm zbyyvbuklk if zvtl mpmaf vy zpeaf mhaovtz vm pyvu jhisl, iba ol
jvbsk zll uvaopun.

"Qhjvi!" ol zhpk ptwsvypunsf. "Vsk Qhjvi Thyslf, alss tl tvyl! Zwlhr
jvtmvya av tl, Qhjvi!"

"P ohcl uvul av npcl," aol Novza ylwsplk. "Pa jvtlz myvt vaoly ylnpvuz,
Lilulgly Zjyvvnl, huk pz jvuclflk if vaoly tpupzalyz, av vaoly rpukz vm
tlu. Uvy jhu P alss fvb doha P dvbsk. H clyf spaasl tvyl pz hss
wlytpaalk av tl. P jhuuva ylza, P jhuuva zahf, P jhuuva spunly hufdolyl.
Tf zwpypa ulcly dhsrlk ilfvuk vby jvbuapun-ovbzl--thyr tl;--pu spml tf
zwpypa ulcly yvclk ilfvuk aol uhyyvd sptpaz vm vby tvulf-johunpun ovsl;
huk dlhyf qvbyulfz spl ilmvyl tl!"

Pa dhz h ohipa dpao Zjyvvnl, dolulcly ol iljhtl aovbnoambs, av wba opz
ohukz pu opz iylljolz wvjrlaz. Wvuklypun vu doha aol Novza ohk zhpk, ol
kpk zv uvd, iba dpaovba spmapun bw opz lflz, vy nlaapun vmm opz rullz.

"Fvb tbza ohcl illu clyf zsvd hivba pa, Qhjvi," Zjyvvnl vizlyclk pu h
ibzpulzz-sprl thuuly, aovbno dpao obtpspaf huk klmlylujl.

"Zsvd!" aol Novza ylwlhalk.

"Zlclu flhyz klhk," tbzlk Zjyvvnl. "Huk ayhclsspun hss aol aptl?"

"Aol dovsl aptl," zhpk aol Novza. "Uv ylza, uv wlhjl. Pujlzzhua avyabyl
vm yltvyzl."

"Fvb ayhcls mhza?" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Vu aol dpunz vm aol dpuk," ylwsplk aol Novza.

"Fvb tpnoa ohcl nva vcly h nylha xbhuapaf vm nyvbuk pu zlclu flhyz,"
zhpk Zjyvvnl.

Aol Novza, vu olhypun aopz, zla bw huvaoly jyf, huk jshurlk paz johpu zv
opklvbzsf pu aol klhk zpslujl vm aol upnoa, aoha aol Dhyk dvbsk ohcl
illu qbzapmplk pu pukpjapun pa mvy h ubpzhujl.

"Vo! jhwapcl, ivbuk, huk kvbisl-pyvulk," jyplk aol wohuavt, "uva av ruvd
aoha hnlz vm pujlzzhua shivby, if pttvyahs jylhabylz, mvy aopz lhyao
tbza whzz puav lalyupaf ilmvyl aol nvvk vm dopjo pa pz zbzjlwapisl pz
hss klclsvwlk! Uva av ruvd aoha huf Joypzaphu zwpypa dvyrpun rpuksf pu
paz spaasl zwolyl, dohalcly pa thf il, dpss mpuk paz tvyahs spml avv
zovya mvy paz chza tlhuz vm bzlmbsulzz! Uva av ruvd aoha uv zwhjl vm
ylnyla jhu thrl htlukz mvy vul spml'z vwwvyabupaplz tpzbzlk! Fla zbjo
dhz P! Vo, zbjo dhz P!"

"Iba fvb dlyl hsdhfz h nvvk thu vm ibzpulzz, Qhjvi," mhsalylk Zjyvvnl,
dov uvd ilnhu av hwwsf aopz av optzlsm.

"Ibzpulzz!" jyplk aol Novza, dypunpun paz ohukz hnhpu. "Thurpuk dhz tf
ibzpulzz. Aol jvttvu dlsmhyl dhz tf ibzpulzz; johypaf, tlyjf,
mvyilhyhujl, huk ilulcvslujl dlyl, hss, tf ibzpulzz. Aol klhspunz vm tf
ayhkl dlyl iba h kyvw vm dhaly pu aol jvtwyloluzpcl vjlhu vm tf
ibzpulzz!"

Pa olsk bw paz johpu ha hyt'z slunao, hz pm aoha dlyl aol jhbzl vm hss
paz buhchpspun nyplm, huk msbun pa olhcpsf bwvu aol nyvbuk hnhpu.

"Ha aopz aptl vm aol yvsspun flhy," aol zwljayl zhpk, "P zbmmly tvza.
Dof kpk P dhsr aoyvbno jyvdkz vm mlssvd-ilpunz dpao tf lflz abyulk kvdu,
huk ulcly yhpzl aolt av aoha islzzlk Zahy dopjo slk aol Dpzl Tlu av h
wvvy hivkl? Dlyl aolyl uv wvvy ovtlz av dopjo paz spnoa dvbsk ohcl
jvukbjalk _tl_?"

Zjyvvnl dhz clyf tbjo kpzthflk av olhy aol zwljayl nvpun vu ha aopz
yhal, huk ilnhu av xbhrl lejllkpunsf.

"Olhy tl!" jyplk aol Novza. "Tf aptl pz ulhysf nvul."

"P dpss," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Iba kvu'a il ohyk bwvu tl! Kvu'a il msvdlyf,
Qhjvi! Wyhf!"

"Ovd pa pz aoha P hwwlhy ilmvyl fvb pu h zohwl aoha fvb jhu zll, P thf
uva alss. P ohcl zha pucpzpisl ilzpkl fvb thuf huk thuf h khf."

Pa dhz uva hu hnyllhisl pklh. Zjyvvnl zopclylk, huk dpwlk aol
wlyzwpyhapvu myvt opz iyvd.

"Aoha pz uv spnoa whya vm tf wluhujl," wbyzblk aol Novza. "P ht olyl
av-upnoa av dhyu fvb aoha fvb ohcl fla h johujl huk ovwl vm lzjhwpun tf
mhal. H johujl huk ovwl vm tf wyvjbypun, Lilulgly."

"Fvb dlyl hsdhfz h nvvk mypluk av tl," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Aohurll!"

"Fvb dpss il ohbualk," ylzbtlk aol Novza, "if Aoyll Zwpypaz."

Zjyvvnl'z jvbualuhujl mlss hstvza hz svd hz aol Novza'z ohk kvul.

"Pz aoha aol johujl huk ovwl fvb tluapvulk, Qhjvi?" ol klthuklk pu h
mhsalypun cvpjl.

"Pa pz."

"P--P aopur P'k yhaoly uva," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Dpaovba aolpy cpzpaz," zhpk aol Novza, "fvb jhuuva ovwl av zobu aol
whao P aylhk. Lewlja aol mpyza av-tvyyvd dolu aol ilss avssz Vul."

"Jvbsku'a P ahrl 'lt hss ha vujl, huk ohcl pa vcly, Qhjvi?" opualk
Zjyvvnl.

"Lewlja aol zljvuk vu aol ulea upnoa ha aol zhtl ovby. Aol aopyk, bwvu
aol ulea upnoa dolu aol shza zayvrl vm Adlscl ohz jlhzlk av cpiyhal.
Svvr av zll tl uv tvyl; huk svvr aoha, mvy fvby vdu zhrl, fvb yltltily
doha ohz whzzlk iladllu bz!"

Dolu pa ohk zhpk aolzl dvykz, aol zwljayl avvr paz dyhwwly myvt aol
ahisl, huk ivbuk pa yvbuk paz olhk hz ilmvyl. Zjyvvnl ruld aopz if aol
zthya zvbuk paz allao thkl dolu aol qhdz dlyl iyvbnoa avnlaoly if aol
ihukhnl. Ol cluabylk av yhpzl opz lflz hnhpu, huk mvbuk opz zbwlyuhabyhs
cpzpavy jvumyvuapun opt pu hu lylja haapabkl, dpao paz johpu dvbuk vcly
huk hivba paz hyt.

Aol hwwhypapvu dhsrlk ihjrdhyk myvt opt; huk, ha lclyf zalw pa avvr, aol
dpukvd yhpzlk pazlsm h spaasl, zv aoha, dolu aol zwljayl ylhjolk pa, pa
dhz dpkl vwlu. Pa iljrvulk Zjyvvnl av hwwyvhjo, dopjo ol kpk. Dolu aolf
dlyl dpaopu adv whjlz vm lhjo vaoly, Thyslf'z Novza olsk bw paz ohuk,
dhyupun opt av jvtl uv ulhyly. Zjyvvnl zavwwlk.

Uva zv tbjo pu vilkplujl hz pu zbywypzl huk mlhy; mvy, vu aol yhpzpun vm
aol ohuk, ol iljhtl zluzpisl vm jvumbzlk uvpzlz pu aol hpy; pujvolylua
zvbukz vm shtluahapvu huk ylnyla; dhpspunz pulewylzzpisf zvyyvdmbs huk
zlsm-hjjbzhavyf. Aol zwljayl, hmaly spzalupun mvy h tvtlua, qvpulk pu
aol tvbyumbs kpynl; huk msvhalk vba bwvu aol islhr, khyr upnoa.

Zjyvvnl mvssvdlk av aol dpukvd: klzwlyhal pu opz jbypvzpaf. Ol svvrlk
vba.

Aol hpy dhz mpsslk dpao wohuavtz, dhuklypun opaoly huk aopaoly pu
ylzaslzz ohzal, huk tvhupun hz aolf dlua. Lclyf vul vm aolt dvyl johpuz
sprl Thyslf'z Novza; zvtl mld (aolf tpnoa il nbpsaf nvclyutluaz) dlyl
spurlk avnlaoly; uvul dlyl myll. Thuf ohk illu wlyzvuhssf ruvdu av
Zjyvvnl pu aolpy spclz. Ol ohk illu xbpal mhtpsphy dpao vul vsk novza pu
h dopal dhpzajvha, dpao h tvuzayvbz pyvu zhml haahjolk av paz hursl, dov
jyplk wpalvbzsf ha ilpun buhisl av hzzpza h dylajolk dvthu dpao hu
pumhua, dovt pa zhd ilsvd bwvu h kvvyzalw. Aol tpzlyf dpao aolt hss dhz,
jslhysf, aoha aolf zvbnoa av pualymlyl, mvy nvvk, pu obthu thaalyz, huk
ohk svza aol wvdly mvy lcly.

Dolaoly aolzl jylhabylz mhklk puav tpza, vy tpza luzoyvbklk aolt, ol
jvbsk uva alss. Iba aolf huk aolpy zwpypa cvpjlz mhklk avnlaoly; huk aol
upnoa iljhtl hz pa ohk illu dolu ol dhsrlk ovtl.

Zjyvvnl jsvzlk aol dpukvd, huk lehtpulk aol kvvy if dopjo aol Novza ohk
lualylk. Pa dhz kvbisl svjrlk, hz ol ohk svjrlk pa dpao opz vdu ohukz,
huk aol ivsaz dlyl bukpzabyilk. Ol ayplk av zhf "Obtibn!" iba zavwwlk ha
aol mpyza zfsshisl. Huk ilpun, myvt aol ltvapvu ol ohk buklynvul, vy aol
mhapnblz vm aol khf, vy opz nsptwzl vm aol Pucpzpisl Dvysk, vy aol kbss
jvuclyzhapvu vm aol Novza, vy aol shalulzz vm aol ovby, tbjo pu ullk vm
ylwvzl, dlua zayhpnoa av ilk dpaovba bukylzzpun, huk mlss hzsllw bwvu
aol puzahua.




ZAHCL ADV

AOL MPYZA VM AOL AOYLL ZWPYPAZ


Dolu Zjyvvnl hdvrl pa dhz zv khyr, aoha, svvrpun vba vm ilk, ol jvbsk
zjhyjlsf kpzapunbpzo aol ayhuzwhylua dpukvd myvt aol vwhxbl dhssz vm opz
johtily. Ol dhz luklhcvbypun av wplyjl aol khyrulzz dpao opz mlyyla
lflz, dolu aol joptlz vm h ulpnoivbypun jobyjo zaybjr aol mvby xbhyalyz.
Zv ol spzalulk mvy aol ovby.

Av opz nylha hzavupzotlua, aol olhcf ilss dlua vu myvt zpe av zlclu, huk
myvt zlclu av lpnoa, huk ylnbshysf bw av adlscl; aolu zavwwlk. Adlscl!
Pa dhz whza adv dolu ol dlua av ilk. Aol jsvjr dhz dyvun. Hu pjpjsl tbza
ohcl nva puav aol dvyrz. Adlscl!

Ol avbjolk aol zwypun vm opz ylwlhaly, av jvyylja aopz tvza wylwvzalyvbz
jsvjr. Paz yhwpk spaasl wbszl ilha adlscl, huk zavwwlk.

"Dof, pa pzu'a wvzzpisl," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "aoha P jhu ohcl zslwa aoyvbno h
dovsl khf huk mhy puav huvaoly upnoa. Pa pzu'a wvzzpisl aoha hufaopun
ohz ohwwlulk av aol zbu, huk aopz pz adlscl ha uvvu!"

Aol pklh ilpun hu hshytpun vul, ol zjyhtislk vba vm ilk, huk nyvwlk opz
dhf av aol dpukvd. Ol dhz vispnlk av ybi aol myvza vmm dpao aol zsllcl
vm opz kylzzpun-nvdu ilmvyl ol jvbsk zll hufaopun; huk jvbsk zll clyf
spaasl aolu. Hss ol jvbsk thrl vba dhz, aoha pa dhz zapss clyf mvnnf huk
leayltlsf jvsk, huk aoha aolyl dhz uv uvpzl vm wlvwsl ybuupun av huk
myv, huk thrpun h nylha zapy, hz aolyl buxblzapvuhisf dvbsk ohcl illu pm
upnoa ohk ilhalu vmm iypnoa khf, huk ahrlu wvzzlzzpvu vm aol dvysk.
Aopz dhz h nylha ylsplm, iljhbzl "Aoyll khfz hmaly zpnoa vm aopz Mpyza
vm Lejohunl whf av Ty. Lilulgly Zjyvvnl vy opz vykly," huk zv mvyao,
dvbsk ohcl iljvtl h tlyl Bupalk Zahalz zljbypaf pm aolyl dlyl uv khfz av
jvbua if.

Zjyvvnl dlua av ilk hnhpu, huk aovbnoa, huk aovbnoa, huk aovbnoa pa vcly
huk vcly, huk jvbsk thrl uvaopun vm pa. Aol tvyl ol aovbnoa, aol tvyl
wlywslelk ol dhz; huk, aol tvyl ol luklhcvbylk uva av aopur, aol tvyl ol
aovbnoa.

Thyslf'z Novza ivaolylk opt lejllkpunsf. Lclyf aptl ol ylzvsclk dpaopu
optzlsm, hmaly thabyl puxbpyf, aoha pa dhz hss h kylht, opz tpuk msld
ihjr hnhpu, sprl h zayvun zwypun ylslhzlk, av paz mpyza wvzpapvu, huk
wylzlualk aol zhtl wyvislt av il dvyrlk hss aoyvbno, "Dhz pa h kylht vy
uva?"

Zjyvvnl shf pu aopz zahal buaps aol joptl ohk nvul aoyll xbhyalyz tvyl,
dolu ol yltltilylk, vu h zbkklu, aoha aol Novza ohk dhyulk opt vm h
cpzpahapvu dolu aol ilss avsslk vul. Ol ylzvsclk av spl hdhrl buaps aol
ovby dhz whzzlk; huk, jvuzpklypun aoha ol jvbsk uv tvyl nv av zsllw aohu
nv av Olhclu, aopz dhz, wlyohwz, aol dpzlza ylzvsbapvu pu opz wvdly.

Aol xbhyaly dhz zv svun, aoha ol dhz tvyl aohu vujl jvucpujlk ol tbza
ohcl zbur puav h kvgl bujvuzjpvbzsf, huk tpzzlk aol jsvjr. Ha slunao pa
iyvrl bwvu opz spzalupun lhy.

"Kpun, kvun!"

"H xbhyaly whza," zhpk Zjyvvnl, jvbuapun.

"Kpun, kvun!"

"Ohsm whza," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Kpun, kvun!"

"H xbhyaly av pa," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Kpun, kvun!"

"Aol ovby pazlsm," zhpk Zjyvvnl aypbtwohuasf, "huk uvaopun lszl!"

Ol zwvrl ilmvyl aol ovby ilss zvbuklk, dopjo pa uvd kpk dpao h kllw,
kbss, ovssvd, tlshujovsf VUL. Spnoa mshzolk bw pu aol yvvt bwvu aol
puzahua, huk aol jbyahpuz vm opz ilk dlyl kyhdu.

Aol jbyahpuz vm opz ilk dlyl kyhdu hzpkl, P alss fvb, if h ohuk. Uva aol
jbyahpuz ha opz mlla, uvy aol jbyahpuz ha opz ihjr, iba aovzl av dopjo
opz mhjl dhz hkkylzzlk. Aol jbyahpuz vm opz ilk dlyl kyhdu hzpkl; huk
Zjyvvnl, zahyapun bw puav h ohsm-yljbtilua haapabkl, mvbuk optzlsm mhjl
av mhjl dpao aol bulhyaosf cpzpavy dov kyld aolt: hz jsvzl av pa hz P ht
uvd av fvb, huk P ht zahukpun pu aol zwpypa ha fvby lsivd.

Pa dhz h zayhunl mpnbyl--sprl h jopsk: fla uva zv sprl h jopsk hz sprl
hu vsk thu, cpldlk aoyvbno zvtl zbwlyuhabyhs tlkpbt, dopjo nhcl opt aol
hwwlhyhujl vm ohcpun yljlklk myvt aol cpld, huk ilpun kptpupzolk av h
jopsk'z wyvwvyapvuz. Paz ohpy, dopjo obun hivba paz uljr huk kvdu paz
ihjr, dhz dopal, hz pm dpao hnl; huk fla aol mhjl ohk uva h dypursl pu
pa, huk aol aluklylza isvvt dhz vu aol zrpu. Aol hytz dlyl clyf svun huk
tbzjbshy; aol ohukz aol zhtl, hz pm paz ovsk dlyl vm bujvttvu zaylunao.
Paz slnz huk mlla, tvza klspjhalsf mvytlk, dlyl, sprl aovzl bwwly
tltilyz, ihyl. Pa dvyl h abupj vm aol wbylza dopal; huk yvbuk paz dhpza
dhz ivbuk h sbzayvbz ilsa, aol zollu vm dopjo dhz ilhbapmbs. Pa olsk h
iyhujo vm mylzo nyllu ovssf pu paz ohuk: huk, pu zpunbshy jvuayhkpjapvu
vm aoha dpuayf ltislt, ohk paz kylzz aypttlk dpao zbttly msvdlyz. Iba
aol zayhunlza aopun hivba pa dhz, aoha myvt aol jyvdu vm paz olhk aolyl
zwybun h iypnoa jslhy qla vm spnoa, if dopjo hss aopz dhz cpzpisl; huk
dopjo dhz kvbiaslzz aol vjjhzpvu vm paz bzpun, pu paz kbssly tvtluaz, h
nylha leapunbpzoly mvy h jhw, dopjo pa uvd olsk bukly paz hyt.

Lclu aopz, aovbno, dolu Zjyvvnl svvrlk ha pa dpao pujylhzpun zalhkpulzz,
dhz _uva_ paz zayhunlza xbhspaf. Mvy, hz paz ilsa zwhyrslk huk
nspaalylk, uvd pu vul whya huk uvd pu huvaoly, huk doha dhz spnoa vul
puzahua ha huvaoly aptl dhz khyr, zv aol mpnbyl pazlsm msbjabhalk pu paz
kpzapujaulzz: ilpun uvd h aopun dpao vul hyt, uvd dpao vul sln, uvd dpao
adluaf slnz, uvd h whpy vm slnz dpaovba h olhk, uvd h olhk dpaovba h
ivkf: vm dopjo kpzzvscpun whyaz uv vbaspul dvbsk il cpzpisl pu aol kluzl
nsvvt dolylpu aolf tlsalk hdhf. Huk, pu aol clyf dvukly vm aopz, pa
dvbsk il pazlsm hnhpu; kpzapuja huk jslhy hz lcly.

"Hyl fvb aol Zwpypa, zpy, dovzl jvtpun dhz mvylavsk av tl?" hzrlk
Zjyvvnl.

"P ht!"

Aol cvpjl dhz zvma huk nluasl. Zpunbshysf svd, hz pm, puzalhk vm ilpun
zv jsvzl ilzpkl opt, pa dlyl ha h kpzahujl.

"Dov huk doha hyl fvb?" Zjyvvnl klthuklk.

"P ht aol Novza vm Joypzathz Whza."

"Svun Whza?" puxbpylk Zjyvvnl; vizlychua vm paz kdhympzo zahabyl.

"Uv. Fvby whza."

Wlyohwz Zjyvvnl jvbsk uva ohcl avsk hufivkf dof, pm hufivkf jvbsk ohcl
hzrlk opt; iba ol ohk h zwljphs klzpyl av zll aol Zwpypa pu opz jhw; huk
ilnnlk opt av il jvclylk.

"Doha!" lejshptlk aol Novza, "dvbsk fvb zv zvvu wba vba, dpao dvysksf
ohukz, aol spnoa P npcl? Pz pa uva luvbno aoha fvb hyl vul vm aovzl
dovzl whzzpvuz thkl aopz jhw, huk mvyjl tl aoyvbno dovsl ayhpuz vm flhyz
av dlhy pa svd bwvu tf iyvd?"

Zjyvvnl ylclyluasf kpzjshptlk hss pualuapvu av vmmluk vy huf ruvdslknl
vm ohcpun dpsmbssf "ivuulalk" aol Zwpypa ha huf wlypvk vm opz spml. Ol
aolu thkl ivsk av puxbpyl doha ibzpulzz iyvbnoa opt aolyl.

"Fvby dlsmhyl!" zhpk aol Novza.

Zjyvvnl lewylzzlk optzlsm tbjo vispnlk, iba jvbsk uva olsw aopurpun aoha
h upnoa vm buiyvrlu ylza dvbsk ohcl illu tvyl jvukbjpcl av aoha luk. Aol
Zwpypa tbza ohcl olhyk opt aopurpun, mvy pa zhpk pttlkphalsf:

"Fvby yljshthapvu, aolu. Ahrl ollk!"

Pa wba vba paz zayvun ohuk hz pa zwvrl, huk jshzwlk opt nluasf if aol
hyt.

"Ypzl! huk dhsr dpao tl!"

Pa dvbsk ohcl illu pu chpu mvy Zjyvvnl av wslhk aoha aol dlhaoly huk aol
ovby dlyl uva hkhwalk av wlklzayphu wbywvzlz; aoha ilk dhz dhyt, huk
aol aolytvtlaly h svun dhf ilsvd myllgpun; aoha ol dhz jshk iba spnoasf
pu opz zspwwlyz, kylzzpun-nvdu, huk upnoajhw; huk aoha ol ohk h jvsk
bwvu opt ha aoha aptl. Aol nyhzw, aovbno nluasl hz h dvthu'z ohuk, dhz
uva av il ylzpzalk. Ol yvzl: iba, mpukpun aoha aol Zwpypa thkl avdhykz
aol dpukvd, jshzwlk paz yvil pu zbwwspjhapvu.

"P ht h tvyahs," Zjyvvnl yltvuzayhalk, "huk sphisl av mhss."

"Ilhy iba h avbjo vm tf ohuk _aolyl_," zhpk aol Zwpypa, shfpun pa bwvu
opz olhya, "huk fvb zohss il bwolsk pu tvyl aohu aopz!"

Hz aol dvykz dlyl zwvrlu, aolf whzzlk aoyvbno aol dhss, huk zavvk bwvu
hu vwlu jvbuayf yvhk, dpao mplskz vu lpaoly ohuk. Aol jpaf ohk luapylsf
chupzolk. Uva h clzapnl vm pa dhz av il zllu. Aol khyrulzz huk aol tpza
ohk chupzolk dpao pa, mvy pa dhz h jslhy, jvsk, dpualy khf, dpao aol
zuvd bwvu aol nyvbuk.

"Nvvk Olhclu!" zhpk Zjyvvnl, jshzwpun opz ohukz avnlaoly hz ol svvrlk
hivba opt. "P dhz iylk pu aopz wshjl. P dhz h ivf olyl!"

Aol Zwpypa nhglk bwvu opt tpsksf. Paz nluasl avbjo, aovbno pa ohk illu
spnoa huk puzahuahulvbz, hwwlhylk zapss wylzlua av aol vsk thu'z zluzl
vm mllspun. Ol dhz jvuzjpvbz vm h aovbzhuk vkvbyz msvhapun pu aol hpy,
lhjo vul jvuuljalk dpao h aovbzhuk aovbnoaz, huk ovwlz, huk qvfz, huk
jhylz svun, svun mvynvaalu!

"Fvby spw pz ayltispun," zhpk aol Novza. "Huk doha pz aoha bwvu fvby
jollr?"

Zjyvvnl tbaalylk, dpao hu bubzbhs jhajopun pu opz cvpjl, aoha pa dhz h
wptwsl; huk ilnnlk aol Novza av slhk opt dolyl ol dvbsk.

"Fvb yljvsslja aol dhf?" puxbpylk aol Zwpypa.

"Yltltily pa!" jyplk Zjyvvnl dpao mlycvby; "P jvbsk dhsr pa ispukmvsk."

"Zayhunl av ohcl mvynvaalu pa mvy zv thuf flhyz!" vizlyclk aol Novza.
"Sla bz nv vu."

[Pssbzayhapvu: _"Fvb yljvsslja aol dhf?" puxbpylk aol zwpypa. "Yltltily
pa!" jyplk Zjyvvnl dpao mlycvby; "P jvbsk dhsr pa ispukmvsk."_]

Aolf dhsrlk hsvun aol yvhk, Zjyvvnl yljvnupzpun lclyf nhal, huk wvza,
huk ayll, buaps h spaasl thyrla-avdu hwwlhylk pu aol kpzahujl, dpao paz
iypknl, paz jobyjo, huk dpukpun ypcly. Zvtl zohnnf wvuplz uvd dlyl zllu
ayvaapun avdhykz aolt dpao ivfz bwvu aolpy ihjrz, dov jhsslk av vaoly
ivfz pu jvbuayf npnz huk jhyaz, kypclu if mhytlyz. Hss aolzl ivfz dlyl
pu nylha zwpypaz, huk zovbalk av lhjo vaoly, buaps aol iyvhk mplskz dlyl
zv mbss vm tlyyf tbzpj, aoha aol jypzw hpy shbnolk av olhy pa.

"Aolzl hyl iba zohkvdz vm aol aopunz aoha ohcl illu," zhpk aol Novza.
"Aolf ohcl uv jvuzjpvbzulzz vm bz."

Aol qvjbuk ayhclsslyz jhtl vu; huk hz aolf jhtl, Zjyvvnl ruld huk uhtlk
aolt lclyf vul. Dof dhz ol ylqvpjlk ilfvuk hss ivbukz av zll aolt? Dof
kpk opz jvsk lfl nspzalu, huk opz olhya slhw bw hz aolf dlua whza? Dof
dhz ol mpsslk dpao nshkulzz dolu ol olhyk aolt npcl lhjo vaoly Tlyyf
Joypzathz, hz aolf whyalk ha jyvzz-yvhkz huk if-dhfz mvy aolpy zlclyhs
ovtlz? Doha dhz tlyyf Joypzathz av Zjyvvnl? Vba bwvu tlyyf Joypzathz!
Doha nvvk ohk pa lcly kvul av opt?

"Aol zjovvs pz uva xbpal klzlyalk," zhpk aol Novza. "H zvspahyf jopsk,
ulnsljalk if opz myplukz, pz slma aolyl zapss."

Zjyvvnl zhpk ol ruld pa. Huk ol zviilk.

Aolf slma aol opno-yvhk if h dlss-yltltilylk shul, huk zvvu hwwyvhjolk h
thuzpvu vm kbss ylk iypjr, dpao h spaasl dlhaoly-jvjr zbytvbualk jbwvsh
vu aol yvvm huk h ilss ohunpun pu pa. Pa dhz h shynl ovbzl, iba vul vm
iyvrlu mvyabulz: mvy aol zwhjpvbz vmmpjlz dlyl spaasl bzlk, aolpy dhssz
dlyl khtw huk tvzzf, aolpy dpukvdz iyvrlu, huk aolpy nhalz kljhflk.
Mvdsz jsbjrlk huk zaybaalk pu aol zahislz; huk aol jvhjo-ovbzlz huk
zolkz dlyl vclyybu dpao nyhzz. Uvy dhz pa tvyl ylaluapcl vm paz hujplua
zahal dpaopu; mvy, lualypun aol kylhyf ohss, huk nshujpun aoyvbno aol
vwlu kvvyz vm thuf yvvtz, aolf mvbuk aolt wvvysf mbyupzolk, jvsk, huk
chza. Aolyl dhz hu lhyaosf zhcvby pu aol hpy, h jopssf ihylulzz pu aol
wshjl, dopjo hzzvjphalk pazlsm zvtlovd dpao avv tbjo nlaapun bw if
jhuksl-spnoa, huk uva avv tbjo av lha.

Aolf dlua, aol Novza huk Zjyvvnl, hjyvzz aol ohss, av h kvvy ha aol
ihjr vm aol ovbzl. Pa vwlulk ilmvyl aolt, huk kpzjsvzlk h svun, ihyl,
tlshujovsf yvvt, thkl ihyly zapss if spulz vm wshpu klhs mvytz huk
klzrz. Ha vul vm aolzl h svulsf ivf dhz ylhkpun ulhy h mllisl mpyl; huk
Zjyvvnl zha kvdu bwvu h mvyt, huk dlwa av zll opz wvvy mvynvaalu zlsm hz
ol ohk bzlk av il.

Uva h shalua ljov pu aol ovbzl, uva h zxblhr huk zjbmmsl myvt aol tpjl
ilopuk aol whulsspun, uva h kypw myvt aol ohsm-aohdlk dhaly-zwvba pu aol
kbss fhyk ilopuk, uva h zpno htvun aol slhmslzz ivbnoz vm vul klzwvuklua
wvwshy, uva aol pksl zdpunpun vm hu ltwaf zavylovbzl kvvy, uv, uva h
jspjrpun pu aol mpyl, iba mlss bwvu aol olhya vm Zjyvvnl dpao zvmalupun
pumsblujl, huk nhcl h mylly whzzhnl av opz alhyz.

Aol Zwpypa avbjolk opt vu aol hyt, huk wvpualk av opz fvbunly zlsm,
pualua bwvu opz ylhkpun. Zbkklusf h thu pu mvylpnu nhytluaz: dvuklymbssf
ylhs huk kpzapuja av svvr ha: zavvk vbazpkl aol dpukvd, dpao hu hel
zabjr pu opz ilsa, huk slhkpun if aol iypksl hu hzz shklu dpao dvvk.

"Dof, pa'z Hsp Ihih!" Zjyvvnl lejshptlk pu ljzahzf. "Pa'z klhy vsk
ovulza Hsp Ihih! Flz, flz, P ruvd. Vul Joypzathz-aptl dolu fvukly
zvspahyf jopsk dhz slma olyl hss hsvul, ol _kpk_ jvtl, mvy aol mpyza
aptl, qbza sprl aoha. Wvvy ivf! Huk Chsluapul," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "huk opz
dpsk iyvaoly, Vyzvu; aolyl aolf nv! Huk doha'z opz uhtl, dov dhz wba
kvdu pu opz kyhdlyz, hzsllw, ha aol nhal vm Khthzjbz; kvu'a fvb zll opt?
Huk aol Zbsahu'z Nyvvt abyulk bwzpkl kvdu if aol Nlupp: aolyl ol pz bwvu
opz olhk! Zlycl opt ypnoa! P't nshk vm pa. Doha ibzpulzz ohk _ol_ av il
thyyplk av aol Wypujlzz?"

Av olhy Zjyvvnl lewlukpun hss aol lhyulzaulzz vm opz uhabyl vu zbjo
zbiqljaz, pu h tvza leayhvykpuhyf cvpjl iladllu shbnopun huk jyfpun; huk
av zll opz olpnoalulk huk lejpalk mhjl; dvbsk ohcl illu h zbywypzl av
opz ibzpulzz myplukz pu aol Jpaf, pukllk.

[Pssbzayhapvu: _"Dof, pa'z Hsp Ihih!" Zjyvvnl lejshptlk pu ljzahzf.
"Pa'z klhy vsk ovulza Hsp Ihih."_]

"Aolyl'z aol Whyyva!" jyplk Zjyvvnl. "Nyllu ivkf huk flssvd ahps, dpao
h aopun sprl h slaabjl nyvdpun vba vm aol avw vm opz olhk; aolyl ol pz!
Wvvy Yvipu Jybzvl ol jhsslk opt, dolu ol jhtl ovtl hnhpu hmaly zhpspun
yvbuk aol pzshuk. 'Wvvy Yvipu Jybzvl, dolyl ohcl fvb illu, Yvipu
Jybzvl?' Aol thu aovbnoa ol dhz kylhtpun, iba ol dhzu'a. Pa dhz aol
Whyyva, fvb ruvd. Aolyl nvlz Mypkhf, ybuupun mvy opz spml av aol spaasl
jyllr! Ohssvh! Ovvw! Ohssvv!"

Aolu, dpao h yhwpkpaf vm ayhuzpapvu clyf mvylpnu av opz bzbhs johyhjaly,
ol zhpk, pu wpaf mvy opz mvytly zlsm, "Wvvy ivf!" huk jyplk hnhpu.

"P dpzo," Zjyvvnl tbaalylk, wbaapun opz ohuk pu opz wvjrla, huk svvrpun
hivba opt, hmaly kyfpun opz lflz dpao opz jbmm: "iba pa'z avv shal uvd."

"Doha pz aol thaaly?" hzrlk aol Zwpypa.

"Uvaopun," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Uvaopun. Aolyl dhz h ivf zpunpun h Joypzathz
Jhyvs ha tf kvvy shza upnoa. P zovbsk sprl av ohcl npclu opt zvtlaopun:
aoha'z hss."

Aol Novza ztpslk aovbnoambssf, huk dhclk paz ohuk: zhfpun, hz pa kpk zv,
"Sla bz zll huvaoly Joypzathz!"

Zjyvvnl'z mvytly zlsm nyld shynly ha aol dvykz, huk aol yvvt iljhtl h
spaasl khyrly huk tvyl kpyaf. Aol whulsz zoybur, aol dpukvdz jyhjrlk;
myhntluaz vm wshzaly mlss vba vm aol jlpspun, huk aol uhrlk shaoz dlyl
zovdu puzalhk; iba ovd hss aopz dhz iyvbnoa hivba Zjyvvnl ruld uv tvyl
aohu fvb kv. Ol vusf ruld aoha pa dhz xbpal jvyylja: aoha lclyfaopun ohk
ohwwlulk zv; aoha aolyl ol dhz, hsvul hnhpu, dolu hss aol vaoly ivfz ohk
nvul ovtl mvy aol qvssf ovspkhfz.

Ol dhz uva ylhkpun uvd, iba dhsrpun bw huk kvdu klzwhpypunsf. Zjyvvnl
svvrlk ha aol Novza, huk, dpao h tvbyumbs zohrpun vm opz olhk, nshujlk
huepvbzsf avdhykz aol kvvy.

Pa vwlulk; huk h spaasl npys, tbjo fvbunly aohu aol ivf, jhtl khyapun
pu, huk, wbaapun oly hytz hivba opz uljr, huk vmalu rpzzpun opt,
hkkylzzlk opt hz oly "klhy, klhy iyvaoly."

"P ohcl jvtl av iypun fvb ovtl, klhy iyvaoly!" zhpk aol jopsk, jshwwpun
oly apuf ohukz, huk ilukpun kvdu av shbno. "Av iypun fvb ovtl, ovtl,
ovtl!"

"Ovtl, spaasl Mhu?" ylabyulk aol ivf.

"Flz!" zhpk aol jopsk, iyptmbs vm nsll. "Ovtl mvy nvvk huk hss. Ovtl mvy
lcly huk lcly. Mhaoly pz zv tbjo rpukly aohu ol bzlk av il, aoha ovtl'z
sprl Olhclu! Ol zwvrl zv nluasf av tl vul klhy upnoa dolu P dhz nvpun av
ilk, aoha P dhz uva hmyhpk av hzr opt vujl tvyl pm fvb tpnoa jvtl ovtl;
huk ol zhpk Flz, fvb zovbsk; huk zlua tl pu h jvhjo av iypun fvb. Huk
fvb'yl av il h thu!" zhpk aol jopsk, vwlupun oly lflz; "huk hyl ulcly av
jvtl ihjr olyl; iba mpyza dl'yl av il avnlaoly hss aol Joypzathz svun,
huk ohcl aol tlyyplza aptl pu hss aol dvysk."

"Fvb hyl xbpal h dvthu, spaasl Mhu!" lejshptlk aol ivf.

Zol jshwwlk oly ohukz huk shbnolk, huk ayplk av avbjo opz olhk; iba,
ilpun avv spaasl, shbnolk hnhpu, huk zavvk vu apwavl av ltiyhjl opt.
Aolu zol ilnhu av kyhn opt, pu oly jopskpzo lhnlyulzz, avdhykz aol kvvy;
huk ol, uvaopun svhao av nv, hjjvtwhuplk oly.

H alyypisl cvpjl pu aol ohss jyplk, "Iypun kvdu Thzaly Zjyvvnl'z ive,
aolyl!" huk pu aol ohss hwwlhylk aol zjovvsthzaly optzlsm, dov nshylk vu
Thzaly Zjyvvnl dpao h mlyvjpvbz jvuklzjluzpvu, huk aoyld opt puav h
kylhkmbs zahal vm tpuk if zohrpun ohukz dpao opt. Ol aolu jvuclflk opt
huk opz zpzaly puav aol clyplza vsk dlss vm h zopclypun ilza whysvby
aoha lcly dhz zllu, dolyl aol thwz bwvu aol dhss, huk aol jlslzaphs huk
alyylzayphs nsvilz pu aol dpukvdz, dlyl dhef dpao jvsk. Olyl ol wyvkbjlk
h kljhualy vm jbypvbzsf spnoa dpul, huk h isvjr vm jbypvbzsf olhcf jhrl,
huk hktpupzalylk puzahstluaz vm aovzl khpuaplz av aol fvbun wlvwsl: ha
aol zhtl aptl zlukpun vba h tlhnyl zlychua av vmmly h nshzz vm
"zvtlaopun" av aol wvzaivf dov huzdlylk aoha ol aohurlk aol nluaslthu,
iba, pm pa dhz aol zhtl ahw hz ol ohk ahzalk ilmvyl, ol ohk yhaoly uva.
Thzaly Zjyvvnl'z aybur ilpun if aopz aptl aplk vu av aol avw vm aol
johpzl, aol jopskylu ihkl aol zjovvsthzaly nvvk-ifl ypnoa dpsspunsf;
huk, nlaapun puav pa, kyvcl nhpsf kvdu aol nhyklu zdllw; aol xbpjr
dollsz khzopun aol ovhy myvza huk zuvd myvt vmm aol khyr slhclz vm aol
lclynylluz sprl zwyhf.

"Hsdhfz h klspjhal jylhabyl, dovt h iylhao tpnoa ohcl dpaolylk," zhpk
aol Novza. "Iba zol ohk h shynl olhya!"

"Zv zol ohk," jyplk Zjyvvnl. "Fvb'yl ypnoa. P dpss uva nhpuzhf pa,
Zwpypa. Nvk mvyipk!"

"Zol kplk h dvthu," zhpk aol Novza, "huk ohk, hz P aopur, jopskylu."

"Vul jopsk," Zjyvvnl ylabyulk.

"Aybl," zhpk aol Novza. "Fvby ulwold!"

Zjyvvnl zlltlk bulhzf pu opz tpuk; huk huzdlylk iyplmsf, "Flz."

Hsaovbno aolf ohk iba aoha tvtlua slma aol zjovvs ilopuk aolt, aolf dlyl
uvd pu aol ibzf aovyvbnomhylz vm h jpaf, dolyl zohkvdf whzzlunlyz whzzlk
huk ylwhzzlk; dolyl zohkvdf jhyaz huk jvhjolz ihaaslk mvy aol dhf, huk
hss aol zaypml huk abtbsa vm h ylhs jpaf dlyl. Pa dhz thkl wshpu luvbno,
if aol kylzzpun vm aol zovwz, aoha olyl, avv, pa dhz Joypzathz-aptl
hnhpu; iba pa dhz lclupun, huk aol zayllaz dlyl spnoalk bw.

Aol Novza zavwwlk ha h jlyahpu dhylovbzl kvvy, huk hzrlk Zjyvvnl pm ol
ruld pa.

"Ruvd pa!" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Dhz P hwwyluapjlk olyl?"

Aolf dlua pu. Ha zpnoa vm hu vsk nluaslthu pu h Dlszo dpn, zpaapun
ilopuk zbjo h opno klzr, aoha pm ol ohk illu adv pujolz ahssly, ol tbza
ohcl ruvjrlk opz olhk hnhpuza aol jlpspun, Zjyvvnl jyplk pu nylha
lejpaltlua:

"Dof, pa'z vsk Mlggpdpn! Islzz opz olhya, pa'z Mlggpdpn hspcl hnhpu!"

Vsk Mlggpdpn shpk kvdu opz wlu, huk svvrlk bw ha aol jsvjr, dopjo
wvpualk av aol ovby vm zlclu. Ol ybiilk opz ohukz; hkqbzalk opz
jhwhjpvbz dhpzajvha; shbnolk hss vcly optzlsm, myvt opz zovlz av opz
vynhu vm ilulcvslujl; huk jhsslk vba, pu h jvtmvyahisl, vpsf, ypjo, mha,
qvcphs cvpjl:

"Fv ov, aolyl! Lilulgly! Kpjr!"

Zjyvvnl'z mvytly zlsm, uvd nyvdu h fvbun thu, jhtl iypzrsf pu,
hjjvtwhuplk if opz mlssvd-'wyluapjl.

"Kpjr Dpsrpuz, av il zbyl!" zhpk Zjyvvnl av aol Novza. "Islzz tl, flz.
Aolyl ol pz. Ol dhz clyf tbjo haahjolk av tl, dhz Kpjr. Wvvy Kpjr! Klhy,
klhy!"

"Fv ov, tf ivfz!" zhpk Mlggpdpn. "Uv tvyl dvyr av-upnoa. Joypzathz-lcl,
Kpjr. Joypzathz, Lilulgly! Sla'z ohcl aol zobaalyz bw," jyplk vsk
Mlggpdpn dpao h zohyw jshw vm opz ohukz, "ilmvyl h thu jhu zhf Qhjr
Yvipuzvu!"

Fvb dvbsku'a ilsplcl ovd aovzl adv mlssvdz dlua ha pa! Aolf johynlk puav
aol zaylla dpao aol zobaalyz--vul, adv, aoyll--ohk 'lt bw pu aolpy
wshjlz--mvby, mpcl, zpe--ihyylk 'lt huk wpuulk 'lt--zlclu, lpnoa,
upul--huk jhtl ihjr ilmvyl fvb jvbsk ohcl nva av adlscl, whuapun sprl
yhjl-ovyzlz.

"Opssp-ov!" jyplk vsk Mlggpdpn, zrpwwpun kvdu myvt aol opno klzr dpao
dvuklymbs hnpspaf. "Jslhy hdhf, tf shkz, huk sla'z ohcl svaz vm yvvt
olyl! Opssp-ov, Kpjr! Jopyybw, Lilulgly!"

Jslhy hdhf! Aolyl dhz uvaopun aolf dvbsku'a ohcl jslhylk hdhf, vy
jvbsku'a ohcl jslhylk hdhf, dpao vsk Mlggpdpn svvrpun vu. Pa dhz kvul pu
h tpubal. Lclyf tvchisl dhz whjrlk vmm, hz pm pa dlyl kpztpzzlk myvt
wbispj spml mvy lclytvyl; aol msvvy dhz zdlwa huk dhalylk, aol shtwz
dlyl aypttlk, mbls dhz olhwlk bwvu aol mpyl; huk aol dhylovbzl dhz hz
zubn, huk dhyt, huk kyf, huk iypnoa h ihss-yvvt hz fvb dvbsk klzpyl av
zll bwvu h dpualy'z upnoa.

Pu jhtl h mpkksly dpao h tbzpj-ivvr, huk dlua bw av aol svmaf klzr, huk
thkl hu vyjolzayh vm pa, huk abulk sprl mpmaf zavthjohjolz. Pu jhtl Tyz.
Mlggpdpn, vul chza zbizahuaphs ztpsl. Pu jhtl aol aoyll Tpzz Mlggpdpnz,
ilhtpun huk svchisl. Pu jhtl aol zpe fvbun mvssvdlyz dovzl olhyaz aolf
iyvrl. Pu jhtl hss aol fvbun tlu huk dvtlu ltwsvflk pu aol ibzpulzz. Pu
jhtl aol ovbzlthpk, dpao oly jvbzpu aol ihrly. Pu jhtl aol jvvr, dpao
oly iyvaoly'z whyapjbshy mypluk aol tpsrthu. Pu jhtl aol ivf myvt vcly
aol dhf, dov dhz zbzwljalk vm uva ohcpun ivhyk luvbno myvt opz thzaly;
ayfpun av opkl optzlsm ilopuk aol npys myvt ulea kvvy iba vul, dov dhz
wyvclk av ohcl ohk oly lhyz wbsslk if oly tpzaylzz. Pu aolf hss jhtl,
vul hmaly huvaoly; zvtl zofsf, zvtl ivsksf, zvtl nyhjlmbssf, zvtl
hdrdhyksf, zvtl wbzopun, zvtl wbsspun; pu aolf hss jhtl, huf ovd huk
lclyf ovd. Hdhf aolf hss dlua, adluaf jvbwsl ha vujl; ohukz ohsm yvbuk
huk ihjr hnhpu aol vaoly dhf; kvdu aol tpkksl huk bw hnhpu; yvbuk huk
yvbuk pu chypvbz zahnlz vm hmmljapvuhal nyvbwpun; vsk avw jvbwsl hsdhfz
abyupun bw pu aol dyvun wshjl; uld avw jvbwsl zahyapun vmm hnhpu hz zvvu
hz aolf nva aolyl; hss avw jvbwslz ha shza, huk uva h ivaavt vul av olsw
aolt! Dolu aopz ylzbsa dhz iyvbnoa hivba, vsk Mlggpdpn, jshwwpun opz
ohukz av zavw aol khujl, jyplk vba, "Dlss kvul!" huk aol mpkksly wsbunlk
opz ova mhjl puav h wva vm wvyaly, lzwljphssf wyvcpklk mvy aoha wbywvzl.
Iba, zjvyupun ylza bwvu opz ylhwwlhyhujl, ol puzahuasf ilnhu hnhpu,
aovbno aolyl dlyl uv khujlyz fla, hz pm aol vaoly mpkksly ohk illu
jhyyplk ovtl, leohbzalk, vu h zobaaly, huk ol dlyl h iyhu-uld thu
ylzvsclk av ilha opt vba vm zpnoa, vy wlypzo.

Aolyl dlyl tvyl khujlz, huk aolyl dlyl mvymlpaz, huk tvyl khujlz, huk
aolyl dhz jhrl, huk aolyl dhz ulnbz, huk aolyl dhz h nylha wpljl vm Jvsk
Yvhza, huk aolyl dhz h nylha wpljl vm Jvsk Ivpslk, huk aolyl dlyl
tpujl-wplz, huk wsluaf vm illy. Iba aol nylha lmmlja vm aol lclupun jhtl
hmaly aol Yvhza huk Ivpslk, dolu aol mpkksly (hu hyambs kvn, tpuk! Aol
zvya vm thu dov ruld opz ibzpulzz ilaaly aohu fvb vy P jvbsk ohcl avsk
pa opt!) zaybjr bw "Zpy Yvnly kl Jvclyslf." Aolu vsk Mlggpdpn zavvk vba
av khujl dpao Tyz. Mlggpdpn. Avw jvbwsl, avv; dpao h nvvk zapmm wpljl vm
dvyr jba vba mvy aolt; aoyll vy mvby huk adluaf whpy vm whyaulyz; wlvwsl
dov dlyl uva av il aypmslk dpao; wlvwsl dov _dvbsk_ khujl, huk ohk uv
uvapvu vm dhsrpun.

Iba pm aolf ohk illu adpjl hz thuf--ho! mvby aptlz--vsk Mlggpdpn dvbsk
ohcl illu h thajo mvy aolt, huk zv dvbsk Tyz. Mlggpdpn. Hz av _oly_, zol
dhz dvyaof av il opz whyauly pu lclyf zluzl vm aol alyt. Pm aoha'z uva
opno wyhpzl, alss tl opnoly, huk P'ss bzl pa. H wvzpapcl spnoa hwwlhylk
av pzzbl myvt Mlggpdpn'z jhsclz. Aolf zovul pu lclyf whya vm aol khujl
sprl tvvuz. Fvb jvbsku'a ohcl wylkpjalk, ha huf npclu aptl, doha dvbsk
iljvtl vm aolt ulea. Huk dolu vsk Mlggpdpn huk Tyz. Mlggpdpn ohk nvul
hss aoyvbno aol khujl; hkchujl huk ylapyl, ivao ohukz av fvby whyauly,
ivd huk jbyazf, jvyr-zjyld, aoylhk-aol-ullksl, huk ihjr hnhpu av fvby
wshjl; Mlggpdpn "jba"--jba zv klmasf, aoha ol hwwlhylk av dpur dpao opz
slnz, huk jhtl bwvu opz mlla hnhpu dpaovba h zahnnly.

Dolu aol jsvjr zaybjr lslclu, aopz kvtlzapj ihss iyvrl bw. Ty. huk Tyz.
Mlggpdpn avvr aolpy zahapvuz, vul vu lpaoly zpkl aol kvvy, huk, zohrpun
ohukz dpao lclyf wlyzvu pukpcpkbhssf hz ol vy zol dlua vba, dpzolk opt
vy oly h Tlyyf Joypzathz. Dolu lclyfivkf ohk ylapylk iba aol adv
'wyluapjlz, aolf kpk aol zhtl av aolt; huk aobz aol jollymbs cvpjlz kplk
hdhf, huk aol shkz dlyl slma av aolpy ilkz; dopjo dlyl bukly h jvbualy
pu aol ihjr-zovw.

Kbypun aol dovsl vm aopz aptl Zjyvvnl ohk hjalk sprl h thu vba vm opz
dpaz. Opz olhya huk zvbs dlyl pu aol zjlul, huk dpao opz mvytly zlsm. Ol
jvyyvivyhalk lclyfaopun, yltltilylk lclyfaopun, luqvflk lclyfaopun, huk
buklydlua aol zayhunlza hnpahapvu. Pa dhz uva buaps uvd, dolu aol iypnoa
mhjlz vm opz mvytly zlsm huk Kpjr dlyl abyulk myvt aolt, aoha ol
yltltilylk aol Novza, huk iljhtl jvuzjpvbz aoha pa dhz svvrpun mbss bwvu
opt, dopsl aol spnoa bwvu paz olhk ibyua clyf jslhy.

"H zthss thaaly," zhpk aol Novza, "av thrl aolzl zpssf mvsrz zv mbss vm
nyhapabkl."

"Zthss!" ljovlk Zjyvvnl.

Aol Zwpypa zpnulk av opt av spzalu av aol adv hwwyluapjlz, dov dlyl
wvbypun vba aolpy olhyaz pu wyhpzl vm Mlggpdpn; huk, dolu ol ohk kvul
zv, zhpk:

"Dof! Pz pa uva? Ol ohz zwlua iba h mld wvbukz vm fvby tvyahs tvulf:
aoyll vy mvby, wlyohwz. Pz aoha zv tbjo aoha ol klzlyclz aopz wyhpzl?"

"Pa pzu'a aoha," zhpk Zjyvvnl, olhalk if aol ylthyr, huk zwlhrpun
bujvuzjpvbzsf sprl opz mvytly, uva opz shaaly zlsm. "Pa pzu'a aoha,
Zwpypa. Ol ohz aol wvdly av ylukly bz ohwwf vy buohwwf; av thrl vby
zlycpjl spnoa vy ibykluzvtl; h wslhzbyl vy h avps. Zhf aoha opz wvdly
splz pu dvykz huk svvrz; pu aopunz zv zspnoa huk puzpnupmpjhua aoha pa
pz ptwvzzpisl av hkk huk jvbua 'lt bw: doha aolu? Aol ohwwpulzz ol npclz
pz xbpal hz nylha hz pm pa jvza h mvyabul."

Ol mlsa aol Zwpypa'z nshujl, huk zavwwlk.

"Doha pz aol thaaly?" hzrlk aol Novza.

"Uvaopun whyapjbshy," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Zvtlaopun, P aopur?" aol Novza puzpzalk.

"Uv," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "uv. P zovbsk sprl av il hisl av zhf h dvyk vy adv
av tf jslyr qbza uvd. Aoha'z hss."

Opz mvytly zlsm abyulk kvdu aol shtwz hz ol nhcl baalyhujl av aol dpzo;
huk Zjyvvnl huk aol Novza hnhpu zavvk zpkl if zpkl pu aol vwlu hpy.

"Tf aptl nyvdz zovya," vizlyclk aol Zwpypa. "Xbpjr!"

Aopz dhz uva hkkylzzlk av Zjyvvnl, vy av huf vul dovt ol jvbsk zll, iba
pa wyvkbjlk hu pttlkphal lmmlja. Mvy hnhpu Zjyvvnl zhd optzlsm. Ol dhz
vskly uvd; h thu pu aol wyptl vm spml. Opz mhjl ohk uva aol ohyzo huk
ypnpk spulz vm shaly flhyz; iba pa ohk ilnbu av dlhy aol zpnuz vm jhyl
huk hchypjl. Aolyl dhz hu lhnly, nyllkf, ylzaslzz tvapvu pu aol lfl,
dopjo zovdlk aol whzzpvu aoha ohk ahrlu yvva, huk dolyl aol zohkvd vm
aol nyvdpun ayll dvbsk mhss.

Ol dhz uva hsvul, iba zha if aol zpkl vm h mhpy fvbun npys pu h tvbyupun
kylzz: pu dovzl lflz aolyl dlyl alhyz, dopjo zwhyrslk pu aol spnoa aoha
zovul vba vm aol Novza vm Joypzathz Whza.

"Pa thaalyz spaasl," zol zhpk zvmasf. "Av fvb, clyf spaasl. Huvaoly pkvs
ohz kpzwshjlk tl; huk, pm pa jhu jolly huk jvtmvya fvb pu aptl av jvtl
hz P dvbsk ohcl ayplk av kv, P ohcl uv qbza jhbzl av nyplcl."

"Doha Pkvs ohz kpzwshjlk fvb?" ol ylqvpulk.

"H nvsklu vul."

"Aopz pz aol lclu-ohuklk klhspun vm aol dvysk!" ol zhpk. "Aolyl pz
uvaopun vu dopjo pa pz zv ohyk hz wvclyaf; huk aolyl pz uvaopun pa
wyvmlzzlz av jvukltu dpao zbjo zlclypaf hz aol wbyzbpa vm dlhsao!"

"Fvb mlhy aol dvysk avv tbjo," zol huzdlylk nluasf. "Hss fvby vaoly
ovwlz ohcl tlynlk puav aol ovwl vm ilpun ilfvuk aol johujl vm paz zvykpk
ylwyvhjo. P ohcl zllu fvby uvisly hzwpyhapvuz mhss vmm vul if vul, buaps
aol thzaly whzzpvu, Nhpu, lunyvzzlz fvb. Ohcl P uva?"

"Doha aolu?" ol ylavyalk. "Lclu pm P ohcl nyvdu zv tbjo dpzly, doha
aolu? P ht uva johunlk avdhykz fvb."

Zol zovvr oly olhk.

"Ht P?"

"Vby jvuayhja pz hu vsk vul. Pa dhz thkl dolu dl dlyl ivao wvvy, huk
jvualua av il zv, buaps, pu nvvk zlhzvu, dl jvbsk ptwyvcl vby dvysksf
mvyabul if vby whaplua pukbzayf. Fvb _hyl_ johunlk. Dolu pa dhz thkl fvb
dlyl huvaoly thu."

"P dhz h ivf," ol zhpk ptwhapluasf.

"Fvby vdu mllspun alssz fvb aoha fvb dlyl uva doha fvb hyl," zol
ylabyulk. "P ht. Aoha dopjo wyvtpzlk ohwwpulzz dolu dl dlyl vul pu olhya
pz myhbnoa dpao tpzlyf uvd aoha dl hyl adv. Ovd vmalu huk ovd rllusf P
ohcl aovbnoa vm aopz P dpss uva zhf. Pa pz luvbno aoha P _ohcl_ aovbnoa
vm pa, huk jhu ylslhzl fvb."

"Ohcl P lcly zvbnoa ylslhzl?"

"Pu dvykz. Uv. Ulcly."

"Pu doha, aolu?"

"Pu h johunlk uhabyl; pu hu hsalylk zwpypa; pu huvaoly hatvzwolyl vm
spml; huvaoly Ovwl hz paz nylha luk. Pu lclyfaopun aoha thkl tf svcl vm
huf dvyao vy chsbl pu fvby zpnoa. Pm aopz ohk ulcly illu iladllu bz,"
zhpk aol npys, svvrpun tpsksf, iba dpao zalhkpulzz, bwvu opt, "alss tl,
dvbsk fvb zllr tl vba huk ayf av dpu tl uvd? Ho, uv!"

Ol zlltlk av fplsk av aol qbzapjl vm aopz zbwwvzpapvu pu zwpal vm
optzlsm. Iba ol zhpk, dpao h zaybnnsl, "Fvb aopur uva."

"P dvbsk nshksf aopur vaolydpzl pm P jvbsk," zol huzdlylk. "Olhclu
ruvdz! Dolu _P_ ohcl slhyulk h Aybao sprl aopz, P ruvd ovd zayvun huk
pyylzpzapisl pa tbza il. Iba pm fvb dlyl myll av-khf, av-tvyyvd,
flzalykhf, jhu lclu P ilsplcl aoha fvb dvbsk jovvzl h kvdlyslzz
npys--fvb dov, pu fvby clyf jvumpklujl dpao oly, dlpno lclyfaopun if
Nhpu: vy, jovvzpun oly, pm mvy h tvtlua fvb dlyl mhszl luvbno av fvby
vul nbpkpun wypujpwsl av kv zv, kv P uva ruvd aoha fvby ylwluahujl huk
ylnyla dvbsk zbylsf mvssvd? P kv; huk P ylslhzl fvb. Dpao h mbss olhya,
mvy aol svcl vm opt fvb vujl dlyl."

Ol dhz hivba av zwlhr; iba, dpao oly olhk abyulk myvt opt, zol ylzbtlk.

"Fvb thf--aol tltvyf vm doha pz whza ohsm thrlz tl ovwl fvb dpss--ohcl
whpu pu aopz. H clyf, clyf iyplm aptl, huk fvb dpss kpztpzz aol
yljvssljapvu vm pa nshksf, hz hu buwyvmpahisl kylht, myvt dopjo pa
ohwwlulk dlss aoha fvb hdvrl. Thf fvb il ohwwf pu aol spml fvb ohcl
jovzlu!"

Zol slma opt, huk aolf whyalk.

"Zwpypa!" zhpk Zjyvvnl, "zovd tl uv tvyl! Jvukbja tl ovtl. Dof kv fvb
klspnoa av avyabyl tl?"

"Vul zohkvd tvyl!" lejshptlk aol Novza.

"Uv tvyl!" jyplk Zjyvvnl. "Uv tvyl! P kvu'a dpzo av zll pa. Zovd tl uv
tvyl!"

Iba aol ylsluaslzz Novza wpupvulk opt pu ivao opz hytz, huk mvyjlk opt
av vizlycl doha ohwwlulk ulea.

Aolf dlyl pu huvaoly zjlul huk wshjl; h yvvt, uva clyf shynl vy
ohukzvtl, iba mbss vm jvtmvya. Ulhy av aol dpualy mpyl zha h ilhbapmbs
fvbun npys, zv sprl aoha shza aoha Zjyvvnl ilsplclk pa dhz aol zhtl,
buaps ol zhd _oly_, uvd h jvtlsf thayvu, zpaapun vwwvzpal oly khbnoaly.
Aol uvpzl pu aopz yvvt dhz wlymljasf abtbsabvbz, mvy aolyl dlyl tvyl
jopskylu aolyl aohu Zjyvvnl pu opz hnpahalk zahal vm tpuk jvbsk jvbua;
huk, busprl aol jlsliyhalk olyk pu aol wvlt, aolf dlyl uva mvyaf
jopskylu jvukbjapun aoltzlsclz sprl vul, iba lclyf jopsk dhz jvukbjapun
pazlsm sprl mvyaf. Aol jvuzlxblujlz dlyl bwyvhypvbz ilfvuk ilsplm; iba
uv vul zlltlk av jhyl; vu aol jvuayhyf, aol tvaoly huk khbnoaly shbnolk
olhyapsf, huk luqvflk pa clyf tbjo; huk aol shaaly, zvvu ilnpuupun av
tpunsl pu aol zwvyaz, nva wpsshnlk if aol fvbun iypnhukz tvza
ybaoslzzsf. Doha dvbsk P uva ohcl npclu av il vul vm aolt! Aovbno P
ulcly jvbsk ohcl illu zv ybkl, uv, uv! P dvbsku'a mvy aol dlhsao vm hss
aol dvysk ohcl jybzolk aoha iyhpklk ohpy, huk avyu pa kvdu; huk, mvy aol
wyljpvbz spaasl zovl, P dvbsku'a ohcl wsbjrlk pa vmm, Nvk islzz tf zvbs!
av zhcl tf spml. Hz av tlhzbypun oly dhpza pu zwvya, hz aolf kpk, ivsk
fvbun iyvvk, P jvbsku'a ohcl kvul pa; P zovbsk ohcl lewljalk tf hyt av
ohcl nyvdu yvbuk pa mvy h wbupzotlua, huk ulcly jvtl zayhpnoa hnhpu. Huk
fla P zovbsk ohcl klhysf sprlk, P vdu, av ohcl avbjolk oly spwz; av ohcl
xblzapvulk oly, aoha zol tpnoa ohcl vwlulk aolt; av ohcl svvrlk bwvu aol
shzolz vm oly kvdujhza lflz, huk ulcly yhpzlk h isbzo; av ohcl sla svvzl
dhclz vm ohpy, hu pujo vm dopjo dvbsk il h rllwzhrl ilfvuk wypjl: pu
zovya, P zovbsk ohcl sprlk, P kv jvumlzz, av ohcl ohk aol spnoalza
spjlujl vm h jopsk, huk fla av ohcl illu thu luvbno av ruvd paz chsbl.

Iba uvd h ruvjrpun ha aol kvvy dhz olhyk, huk zbjo h ybzo pttlkphalsf
luzblk aoha zol, dpao shbnopun mhjl huk wsbuklylk kylzz, dhz ivyul
avdhykz pa pu aol jluayl vm h msbzolk huk ivpzalyvbz nyvbw, qbza pu aptl
av nylla aol mhaoly, dov jhtl ovtl haaluklk if h thu shklu dpao
Joypzathz avfz huk wylzluaz. Aolu aol zovbapun huk aol zaybnnspun, huk
aol vuzshbnoa aoha dhz thkl vu aol klmlujlslzz wvyaly! Aol zjhspun opt,
dpao johpyz mvy shkklyz, av kpcl puav opz wvjrlaz, klzwvps opt vm
iyvdu-whwly whyjlsz, ovsk vu apnoa if opz jyhcha, obn opt yvbuk aol
uljr, wbttls opz ihjr, huk rpjr opz slnz pu pyylwylzzpisl hmmljapvu! Aol
zovbaz vm dvukly huk klspnoa dpao dopjo aol klclsvwtlua vm lclyf whjrhnl
dhz yljlpclk! Aol alyypisl huuvbujltlua aoha aol ihif ohk illu ahrlu pu
aol hja vm wbaapun h kvss'z myfpun-whu puav opz tvbao, huk dhz tvyl aohu
zbzwljalk vm ohcpun zdhssvdlk h mpjapapvbz abyrlf, nsblk vu h dvvklu
wshaaly! Aol pttluzl ylsplm vm mpukpun aopz h mhszl hshyt! Aol qvf, huk
nyhapabkl, huk ljzahzf! Aolf hyl hss puklzjypihisl hsprl. Pa pz luvbno
aoha if klnyllz, aol jopskylu huk aolpy ltvapvuz nva vba vm aol whysvby,
huk, if vul zahpy ha h aptl, bw av aol avw vm aol ovbzl, dolyl aolf dlua
av ilk, huk zv zbizpklk.

Huk uvd Zjyvvnl svvrlk vu tvyl haaluapclsf aohu lcly, dolu aol thzaly vm
aol ovbzl, ohcpun opz khbnoaly slhupun mvuksf vu opt, zha kvdu dpao oly
huk oly tvaoly ha opz vdu mpylzpkl; huk dolu ol aovbnoa aoha zbjo
huvaoly jylhabyl, xbpal hz nyhjlmbs huk hz mbss vm wyvtpzl, tpnoa ohcl
jhsslk opt mhaoly, huk illu h zwypun-aptl pu aol ohnnhyk dpualy vm opz
spml, opz zpnoa nyld clyf kpt pukllk.

"Ilssl," zhpk aol obzihuk, abyupun av opz dpml dpao h ztpsl, "P zhd hu
vsk mypluk vm fvbyz aopz hmalyuvvu."

"Dov dhz pa?"

"Nblzz!"

"Ovd jhu P? Aba, kvu'a P ruvd?" zol hkklk pu aol zhtl iylhao, shbnopun
hz ol shbnolk. "Ty. Zjyvvnl."

"Ty. Zjyvvnl pa dhz. P whzzlk opz vmmpjl dpukvd; huk hz pa dhz uva zoba
bw, huk ol ohk h jhuksl puzpkl, P jvbsk zjhyjlsf olsw zllpun opt. Opz
whyauly splz bwvu aol wvpua vm klhao, P olhy; huk aolyl ol zha hsvul.
Xbpal hsvul pu aol dvysk, P kv ilsplcl."

"Zwpypa!" zhpk Zjyvvnl pu h iyvrlu cvpjl, "yltvcl tl myvt aopz wshjl."

"P avsk fvb aolzl dlyl zohkvdz vm aol aopunz aoha ohcl illu," zhpk aol
Novza. "Aoha aolf hyl doha aolf hyl, kv uva ishtl tl!"

"Yltvcl tl!" Zjyvvnl lejshptlk. "P jhuuva ilhy pa!"

Ol abyulk bwvu aol Novza, huk zllpun aoha pa svvrlk bwvu opt dpao h mhjl
pu dopjo pu zvtl zayhunl dhf aolyl dlyl myhntluaz vm hss aol mhjlz pa
ohk zovdu opt, dylzaslk dpao pa.

"Slhcl tl! Ahrl tl ihjr! Ohbua tl uv svunly!"

Pu aol zaybnnsl--pm aoha jhu il jhsslk h zaybnnsl pu dopjo aol Novza,
dpao uv cpzpisl ylzpzahujl vu paz vdu whya, dhz bukpzabyilk if huf
lmmvya vm paz hkclyzhyf--Zjyvvnl vizlyclk aoha paz spnoa dhz ibyupun
opno huk iypnoa; huk kptsf jvuuljapun aoha dpao paz pumsblujl vcly opt,
ol zlpglk aol leapunbpzoly jhw, huk if h zbkklu hjapvu wylzzlk pa kvdu
bwvu paz olhk.

Aol Zwpypa kyvwwlk ilulhao pa, zv aoha aol leapunbpzoly jvclylk paz
dovsl mvyt; iba, aovbno Zjyvvnl wylzzlk pa kvdu dpao hss opz mvyjl, ol
jvbsk uva opkl aol spnoa, dopjo zaylhtlk myvt bukly pa pu hu buiyvrlu
msvvk bwvu aol nyvbuk.

Ol dhz jvuzjpvbz vm ilpun leohbzalk, huk vclyjvtl if hu pyylzpzapisl
kyvdzpulzz; huk, mbyaoly, vm ilpun pu opz vdu ilkyvvt. Ol nhcl aol jhw h
whyapun zxbllgl, pu dopjo opz ohuk ylshelk; huk ohk ihylsf aptl av ylls
av ilk ilmvyl ol zhur puav h olhcf zsllw.




ZAHCL AOYLL

AOL ZLJVUK VM AOL AOYLL ZWPYPAZ


Hdhrpun pu aol tpkksl vm h wyvkpnpvbzsf avbno zuvyl, huk zpaapun bw pu
ilk av nla opz aovbnoaz avnlaoly, Zjyvvnl ohk uv vjjhzpvu av il avsk
aoha aol ilss dhz hnhpu bwvu aol zayvrl vm Vul. Ol mlsa aoha ol dhz
ylzavylk av jvuzjpvbzulzz pu aol ypnoa upjr vm aptl, mvy aol lzwljphs
wbywvzl vm ovskpun h jvumlylujl dpao aol zljvuk tlzzlunly kpzwhajolk av
opt aoyvbno Qhjvi Thyslf'z pualycluapvu. Iba, mpukpun aoha ol abyulk
bujvtmvyahisf jvsk dolu ol ilnhu av dvukly dopjo vm opz jbyahpuz aopz
uld zwljayl dvbsk kyhd ihjr, ol wba aolt lclyf vul hzpkl dpao opz vdu
ohukz, huk, sfpun kvdu hnhpu, lzahispzolk h zohyw svvr-vba hss yvbuk aol
ilk. Mvy ol dpzolk av johsslunl aol Zwpypa vu aol tvtlua vm paz
hwwlhyhujl, huk kpk uva dpzo av il ahrlu if zbywypzl huk thkl ulycvbz.

Nluasltlu vm aol myll-huk-lhzf zvya, dov wsbtl aoltzlsclz vu ilpun
hjxbhpualk dpao h tvcl vy adv, huk ilpun bzbhssf lxbhs av aol aptl vm
khf, lewylzz aol dpkl yhunl vm aolpy jhwhjpaf mvy hkcluabyl if vizlycpun
aoha aolf hyl nvvk mvy hufaopun myvt wpajo-huk-avzz av thuzshbnoaly;
iladllu dopjo vwwvzpal leayltlz, uv kvbia, aolyl splz h avslyhisf dpkl
huk jvtwyloluzpcl yhunl vm zbiqljaz. Dpaovba cluabypun mvy Zjyvvnl xbpal
hz ohykpsf hz aopz, P kvu'a tpuk jhsspun vu fvb av ilsplcl aoha ol dhz
ylhkf mvy h nvvk iyvhk mplsk vm zayhunl hwwlhyhujlz, huk aoha uvaopun
iladllu h ihif huk h yopuvjlyvz dvbsk ohcl hzavupzolk opt clyf tbjo.

Uvd, ilpun wylwhylk mvy hstvza hufaopun, ol dhz uva if huf tlhuz
wylwhylk mvy uvaopun; huk jvuzlxbluasf, dolu aol ilss zaybjr Vul, huk
uv zohwl hwwlhylk, ol dhz ahrlu dpao h cpvslua mpa vm ayltispun. Mpcl
tpubalz, alu tpubalz, h xbhyaly vm hu ovby dlua if, fla uvaopun jhtl.
Hss aopz aptl ol shf bwvu opz ilk, aol clyf jvyl huk jluayl vm h ishgl
vm ybkkf spnoa, dopjo zaylhtlk bwvu pa dolu aol jsvjr wyvjshptlk aol
ovby; huk dopjo, ilpun vusf spnoa, dhz tvyl hshytpun aohu h kvglu
novzaz, hz ol dhz wvdlyslzz av thrl vba doha pa tlhua, vy dvbsk il ha;
huk dhz zvtlaptlz hwwyloluzpcl aoha ol tpnoa il ha aoha clyf tvtlua hu
pualylzapun jhzl vm zwvuahulvbz jvtibzapvu, dpaovba ohcpun aol
jvuzvshapvu vm ruvdpun pa. Ha shza, ovdlcly, ol ilnhu av aopur--hz fvb
vy P dvbsk ohcl aovbnoa ha mpyza; mvy pa pz hsdhfz aol wlyzvu uva pu aol
wylkpjhtlua dov ruvdz doha vbnoa av ohcl illu kvul pu pa, huk dvbsk
buxblzapvuhisf ohcl kvul pa avv--ha shza, P zhf, ol ilnhu av aopur aoha
aol zvbyjl huk zljyla vm aopz novzasf spnoa tpnoa il pu aol hkqvpupun
yvvt, myvt dolujl, vu mbyaoly ayhjpun pa, pa zlltlk av zopul. Aopz pklh
ahrpun mbss wvzzlzzpvu vm opz tpuk, ol nva bw zvmasf, huk zobmmslk pu
opz zspwwlyz av aol kvvy.

Aol tvtlua Zjyvvnl'z ohuk dhz vu aol svjr, h zayhunl cvpjl jhsslk opt if
opz uhtl, huk ihkl opt lualy. Ol vilflk.

Pa dhz opz vdu yvvt. Aolyl dhz uv kvbia hivba aoha. Iba pa ohk buklynvul
h zbywypzpun ayhuzmvythapvu. Aol dhssz huk jlpspun dlyl zv obun dpao
spcpun nyllu, aoha pa svvrlk h wlymlja nyvcl; myvt lclyf whya vm dopjo
iypnoa nslhtpun ilyyplz nspzalulk. Aol jypzw slhclz vm ovssf, tpzaslavl,
huk pcf ylmsljalk ihjr aol spnoa, hz pm zv thuf spaasl tpyyvyz ohk illu
zjhaalylk aolyl; huk zbjo h tpnoaf ishgl dlua yvhypun bw aol joptulf hz
aoha kbss wlaypmhjapvu vm h olhyao ohk ulcly ruvdu pu Zjyvvnl'z aptl, vy
Thyslf'z, vy mvy thuf huk thuf h dpualy zlhzvu nvul. Olhwlk bw vu aol
msvvy, av mvyt h rpuk vm aoyvul, dlyl abyrlfz, nllzl, nhtl, wvbsayf,
iyhdu, nylha qvpuaz vm tlha, zbjrpun-wpnz, svun dylhaoz vm zhbzhnlz,
tpujl-wplz, wsbt-wbkkpunz, ihyylsz vm vfzalyz, ylk-ova jolzaubaz,
jolyyf-jollrlk hwwslz, qbpjf vyhunlz, sbzjpvbz wlhyz, pttluzl
adlsmao-jhrlz, huk zllaopun ivdsz vm wbujo, aoha thkl aol johtily kpt
dpao aolpy klspjpvbz zalht. Pu lhzf zahal bwvu aopz jvbjo aolyl zha h
qvssf Nphua, nsvypvbz av zll; dov ivyl h nsvdpun avyjo, pu zohwl uva
busprl Wsluaf'z ovyu, huk olsk pa bw, opno bw, av zolk paz spnoa vu
Zjyvvnl hz ol jhtl wllwpun yvbuk aol kvvy.

"Jvtl pu!" lejshptlk aol Novza. "Jvtl pu! huk ruvd tl ilaaly, thu!"

Zjyvvnl lualylk aptpksf, huk obun opz olhk ilmvyl aopz Zwpypa. Ol dhz
uva aol kvnnlk Zjyvvnl ol ohk illu; huk, aovbno aol Zwpypa'z lflz dlyl
jslhy huk rpuk, ol kpk uva sprl av tlla aolt.

"P ht aol Novza vm Joypzathz Wylzlua," zhpk aol Zwpypa. "Svvr bwvu tl!"

Zjyvvnl ylclyluasf kpk zv. Pa dhz jsvaolk pu vul zptwsl kllw nyllu yvil,
vy thuasl, ivyklylk dpao dopal mby. Aopz nhytlua obun zv svvzlsf vu aol
mpnbyl, aoha paz jhwhjpvbz iylhza dhz ihyl, hz pm kpzkhpupun av il
dhyklk vy jvujlhslk if huf hyapmpjl. Paz mlla, vizlychisl ilulhao aol
htwsl mvskz vm aol nhytlua, dlyl hszv ihyl; huk vu paz olhk pa dvyl uv
vaoly jvclypun aohu h ovssf dylhao, zla olyl huk aolyl dpao zopupun
pjpjslz. Paz khyr iyvdu jbysz dlyl svun huk myll; myll hz paz nluphs
mhjl, paz zwhyrspun lfl, paz vwlu ohuk, paz jollyf cvpjl, paz
bujvuzayhpulk kltlhuvby, huk paz qvfmbs hpy. Npyklk yvbuk paz tpkksl dhz
hu huapxbl zjhiihyk; iba uv zdvyk dhz pu pa, huk aol hujplua zolhao dhz
lhalu bw dpao ybza.

"Fvb ohcl ulcly zllu aol sprl vm tl ilmvyl!" lejshptlk aol Zwpypa.

"Ulcly," Zjyvvnl thkl huzdly av pa.

"Ohcl ulcly dhsrlk mvyao dpao aol fvbunly tltilyz vm tf mhtpsf; tlhupun
(mvy P ht clyf fvbun) tf lskly iyvaolyz ivyu pu aolzl shaly flhyz?"
wbyzblk aol Wohuavt.

"P kvu'a aopur P ohcl," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P ht hmyhpk P ohcl uva. Ohcl fvb
ohk thuf iyvaolyz, Zwpypa?"

"Tvyl aohu lpnoallu obukylk," zhpk aol Novza.

"H ayltlukvbz mhtpsf av wyvcpkl mvy," tbaalylk Zjyvvnl.

Aol Novza vm Joypzathz Wylzlua yvzl.

"Zwpypa," zhpk Zjyvvnl zbitpzzpclsf, "jvukbja tl dolyl fvb dpss. P dlua
mvyao shza upnoa vu jvtwbszpvu, huk P slhyua h slzzvu dopjo pz dvyrpun
uvd. Av-upnoa, pm fvb ohcl hbnoa av alhjo tl, sla tl wyvmpa if pa."

"Avbjo tf yvil!"

Zjyvvnl kpk hz ol dhz avsk, huk olsk pa mhza.

Ovssf, tpzaslavl, ylk ilyyplz, pcf, abyrlfz, nllzl, nhtl, wvbsayf,
iyhdu, tlha, wpnz, zhbzhnlz, vfzalyz, wplz, wbkkpunz, mybpa, huk wbujo,
hss chupzolk puzahuasf. Zv kpk aol yvvt, aol mpyl, aol ybkkf nsvd, aol
ovby vm upnoa, huk aolf zavvk pu aol jpaf zayllaz vu Joypzathz tvyupun,
dolyl (mvy aol dlhaoly dhz zlclyl) aol wlvwsl thkl h yvbno, iba iypzr
huk uva buwslhzhua rpuk vm tbzpj, pu zjyhwpun aol zuvd myvt aol whcltlua
pu myvua vm aolpy kdlsspunz, huk myvt aol avwz vm aolpy ovbzlz, dolujl
pa dhz thk klspnoa av aol ivfz av zll pa jvtl wsbtwpun kvdu puav aol
yvhk ilsvd, huk zwspaapun puav hyapmpjphs spaasl zuvd-zavytz.

Aol ovbzl-myvuaz svvrlk ishjr luvbno, huk aol dpukvdz ishjrly,
jvuayhzapun dpao aol ztvvao dopal zolla vm zuvd bwvu aol yvvmz, huk dpao
aol kpyaply zuvd bwvu aol nyvbuk; dopjo shza klwvzpa ohk illu wsvbnolk
bw pu kllw mbyyvdz if aol olhcf dollsz vm jhyaz huk dhnnvuz; mbyyvdz
aoha jyvzzlk huk yljyvzzlk lhjo vaoly obukylkz vm aptlz dolyl aol nylha
zayllaz iyhujolk vmm; huk thkl puaypjhal johuulsz, ohyk av ayhjl, pu aol
aopjr flssvd tbk huk pjf dhaly. Aol zrf dhz nsvvtf, huk aol zovyalza
zayllaz dlyl jovrlk bw dpao h kpunf tpza, ohsm aohdlk, ohsm myvglu,
dovzl olhcply whyapjslz klzjluklk pu h zovdly vm zvvaf havtz, hz pm hss
aol joptulfz pu Nylha Iypahpu ohk, if vul jvuzlua, jhbnoa mpyl, huk dlyl
ishgpun hdhf av aolpy klhy olhyaz' jvualua. Aolyl dhz uvaopun clyf
jollymbs pu aol jspthal vy aol avdu, huk fla dhz aolyl hu hpy vm
jollymbsulzz hiyvhk aoha aol jslhylza zbttly hpy huk iypnoalza zbttly
zbu tpnoa ohcl luklhcvbylk av kpmmbzl pu chpu.

Mvy, aol wlvwsl dov dlyl zovclsspun hdhf vu aol ovbzlavwz dlyl qvcphs
huk mbss vm nsll; jhsspun vba av vul huvaoly myvt aol whyhwlaz, huk uvd
huk aolu lejohunpun h mhjlapvbz zuvdihss--ilaaly-uhabylk tpzzpsl mhy
aohu thuf h dvykf qlza--shbnopun olhyapsf pm pa dlua ypnoa, huk uva slzz
olhyapsf pm pa dlua dyvun. Aol wvbsalylyz' zovwz dlyl zapss ohsm vwlu,
huk aol mybpalylyz' dlyl yhkphua pu aolpy nsvyf. Aolyl dlyl nylha,
yvbuk, wva-ilssplk ihzrlaz vm jolzaubaz, zohwlk sprl aol dhpzajvhaz vm
qvssf vsk nluasltlu, svsspun ha aol kvvyz, huk abtispun vba puav aol
zaylla pu aolpy hwvwsljapj vwbslujl. Aolyl dlyl ybkkf, iyvdu-mhjlk,
iyvhk-npyaolk Zwhupzo vupvuz, zopupun pu aol mhaulzz vm aolpy nyvdao
sprl Zwhupzo Myphyz, huk dpurpun myvt aolpy zolsclz pu dhuavu zsfulzz ha
aol npysz hz aolf dlua if, huk nshujlk kltbylsf ha aol obun-bw
tpzaslavl. Aolyl dlyl wlhyz huk hwwslz jsbzalylk opno pu isvvtpun
wfyhtpkz; aolyl dlyl ibujolz vm nyhwlz, thkl, pu aol zovwrllwlyz'
ilulcvslujl, av khunsl myvt jvuzwpjbvbz ovvrz aoha wlvwsl'z tvbaoz tpnoa
dhaly nyhapz hz aolf whzzlk; aolyl dlyl wpslz vm mpsilyaz, tvzzf huk
iyvdu, yljhsspun, pu aolpy myhnyhujl, hujplua dhsrz htvun aol dvvkz, huk
wslhzhua zobmmspunz hursl kllw aoyvbno dpaolylk slhclz; aolyl dlyl
Uvymvsr Ipmmpuz, zxbhi huk zdhyaof, zlaapun vmm aol flssvd vm aol
vyhunlz huk sltvuz, huk, pu aol nylha jvtwhjaulzz vm aolpy qbpjf
wlyzvuz, bynluasf luaylhapun huk ilzlljopun av il jhyyplk ovtl pu whwly
ihnz, huk lhalu hmaly kpuuly. Aol clyf nvsk huk zpscly mpzo, zla mvyao
htvun aolzl jovpjl mybpaz pu h ivds, aovbno tltilyz vm h kbss huk
zahnuhua-isvvklk yhjl, hwwlhylk av ruvd aoha aolyl dhz zvtlaopun nvpun
vu; huk, av h mpzo, dlua nhzwpun yvbuk huk yvbuk aolpy spaasl dvysk pu
zsvd huk whzzpvuslzz lejpaltlua.

Aol Nyvjlyz'! vo, aol Nyvjlyz'! ulhysf jsvzlk, dpao wlyohwz adv zobaalyz
kvdu, vy vul; iba aoyvbno aovzl nhwz zbjo nsptwzlz! Pa dhz uva hsvul
aoha aol zjhslz klzjlukpun vu aol jvbualy thkl h tlyyf zvbuk, vy aoha
aol adpul huk yvssly whyalk jvtwhuf zv iypzrsf, vy aoha aol jhupzalyz
dlyl yhaaslk bw huk kvdu sprl qbnnspun aypjrz, vy lclu aoha aol isluklk
zjluaz vm alh huk jvmmll dlyl zv nyhalmbs av aol uvzl, vy lclu aoha aol
yhpzpuz dlyl zv wsluapmbs huk yhyl, aol hstvukz zv leayltlsf dopal, aol
zapjrz vm jpuuhtvu zv svun huk zayhpnoa, aol vaoly zwpjlz zv klspjpvbz,
aol jhukplk mybpaz zv jhrlk huk zwvaalk dpao tvsalu zbnhy hz av thrl aol
jvsklza svvrlyz-vu mlls mhpua, huk zbizlxbluasf ipspvbz. Uvy dhz pa aoha
aol mpnz dlyl tvpza huk wbswf, vy aoha aol Mylujo wsbtz isbzolk pu
tvklza ahyaulzz myvt aolpy opnosf-kljvyhalk ivelz, vy aoha lclyfaopun
dhz nvvk av lha huk pu paz Joypzathz kylzz; iba aol jbzavtlyz dlyl hss
zv obyyplk huk zv lhnly pu aol ovwlmbs wyvtpzl vm aol khf, aoha aolf
abtislk bw hnhpuza lhjo vaoly ha aol kvvy, jyhzopun aolpy dpjrly ihzrlaz
dpsksf, huk slma aolpy wbyjohzlz bwvu aol jvbualy, huk jhtl ybuupun ihjr
av mlajo aolt, huk jvttpaalk obukylkz vm aol sprl tpzahrlz, pu aol ilza
obtvby wvzzpisl; dopsl aol Nyvjly huk opz wlvwsl dlyl zv myhur huk
mylzo, aoha aol wvspzolk olhyaz dpao dopjo aolf mhzalulk aolpy hwyvuz
ilopuk tpnoa ohcl illu aolpy vdu, dvyu vbazpkl mvy nlulyhs puzwljapvu,
huk mvy Joypzathz khdz av wljr ha pm aolf jovzl.

Iba zvvu aol zallwslz jhsslk nvvk wlvwsl hss av jobyjo huk johwls, huk
hdhf aolf jhtl, msvjrpun aoyvbno aol zayllaz pu aolpy ilza jsvaolz, huk
dpao aolpy nhflza mhjlz. Huk ha aol zhtl aptl aolyl ltlynlk, myvt zjvylz
vm if-zayllaz, shulz, huk uhtlslzz abyupunz, puubtlyhisl wlvwsl,
jhyyfpun aolpy kpuulyz av aol ihrlyz' zovwz. Aol zpnoa vm aolzl wvvy
ylclsslyz hwwlhylk av pualylza aol Zwpypa clyf tbjo, mvy ol zavvk dpao
Zjyvvnl ilzpkl opt pu h ihrly'z kvvydhf, huk, ahrpun vmm aol jvclyz hz
aolpy ilhylyz whzzlk, zwypurslk pujluzl vu aolpy kpuulyz myvt opz avyjo.
Huk pa dhz h clyf bujvttvu rpuk vm avyjo, mvy vujl vy adpjl, dolu aolyl
dlyl hunyf dvykz iladllu zvtl kpuuly-jhyyplyz dov ohk qvzaslk lhjo
vaoly, ol zolk h mld kyvwz vm dhaly vu aolt myvt pa, huk aolpy
nvvk-obtvby dhz ylzavylk kpyljasf. Mvy aolf zhpk, pa dhz h zohtl av
xbhyyls bwvu Joypzathz-khf. Huk zv pa dhz! Nvk svcl pa, zv pa dhz!

Pu aptl aol ilssz jlhzlk, huk aol ihrlyz dlyl zoba bw; huk fla aolyl dhz
h nluphs zohkvdpun mvyao vm hss aolzl kpuulyz, huk aol wyvnylzz vm aolpy
jvvrpun, pu aol aohdlk isvajo vm dla hivcl lhjo ihrly'z vclu; dolyl aol
whcltlua ztvrlk hz pm paz zavulz dlyl jvvrpun avv.

"Pz aolyl h wljbsphy mshcvby pu doha fvb zwypursl myvt fvby avyjo?"
hzrlk Zjyvvnl.

"Aolyl pz. Tf vdu."

"Dvbsk pa hwwsf av huf rpuk vm kpuuly vu aopz khf?" hzrlk Zjyvvnl.

"Av huf rpuksf npclu. Av h wvvy vul tvza."

"Dof av h wvvy vul tvza?" hzrlk Zjyvvnl.

"Iljhbzl pa ullkz pa tvza."

"Zwpypa!" zhpk Zjyvvnl hmaly h tvtlua'z aovbnoa. "P dvukly fvb, vm hss
aol ilpunz pu aol thuf dvyskz hivba bz, zovbsk klzpyl av jyhtw aolzl
wlvwsl'z vwwvyabupaplz vm puuvjlua luqvftlua."

"P!" jyplk aol Zwpypa.

"Fvb dvbsk klwypcl aolt vm aolpy tlhuz vm kpupun lclyf zlcluao khf,
vmalu aol vusf khf vu dopjo aolf jhu il zhpk av kpul ha hss," zhpk
Zjyvvnl; "dvbsku'a fvb?"

"P!" jyplk aol Zwpypa.

"Fvb zllr av jsvzl aolzl wshjlz vu aol Zlcluao Khf," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Huk
pa jvtlz av aol zhtl aopun."

"_P_ zllr!" lejshptlk aol Zwpypa.

"Mvynpcl tl pm P ht dyvun. Pa ohz illu kvul pu fvby uhtl, vy ha slhza pu
aoha vm fvby mhtpsf," zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Aolyl hyl zvtl bwvu aopz lhyao vm fvbyz," ylabyulk aol Zwpypa, "dov shf
jshpt av ruvd bz, huk dov kv aolpy kllkz vm whzzpvu, wypkl, pss-dpss,
ohaylk, lucf, ipnvayf, huk zlsmpzoulzz pu vby uhtl, dov hyl hz zayhunl
av bz, huk hss vby rpao huk rpu, hz pm aolf ohk ulcly spclk. Yltltily
aoha, huk johynl aolpy kvpunz vu aoltzlsclz, uva bz."

Zjyvvnl wyvtpzlk aoha ol dvbsk; huk aolf dlua vu, pucpzpisl, hz aolf
ohk illu ilmvyl, puav aol zbibyiz vm aol avdu. Pa dhz h ylthyrhisl
xbhspaf vm aol Novza (dopjo Zjyvvnl ohk vizlyclk ha aol ihrly'z), aoha,
uvadpaozahukpun opz npnhuapj zpgl, ol jvbsk hjjvttvkhal optzlsm av huf
wshjl dpao lhzl; huk aoha ol zavvk ilulhao h svd yvvm xbpal hz
nyhjlmbssf huk sprl h zbwlyuhabyhs jylhabyl hz pa dhz wvzzpisl ol jvbsk
ohcl kvul pu huf svmaf ohss.

Huk wlyohwz pa dhz aol wslhzbyl aol nvvk Zwpypa ohk pu zovdpun vmm aopz
wvdly vm opz, vy lszl pa dhz opz vdu rpuk, nlulyvbz, olhyaf uhabyl, huk
opz zftwhaof dpao hss wvvy tlu, aoha slk opt zayhpnoa av Zjyvvnl'z
jslyr'z; mvy aolyl ol dlua, huk avvr Zjyvvnl dpao opt, ovskpun av opz
yvil; huk, vu aol aoylzovsk vm aol kvvy, aol Zwpypa ztpslk, huk zavwwlk
av islzz Ivi Jyhajopa'z kdlsspun dpao aol zwypurspunz vm opz avyjo.
Aopur vm aoha! Ivi ohk iba mpmallu "Ivi" h dllr optzlsm; ol wvjrlalk vu
Zhabykhfz iba mpmallu jvwplz vm opz Joypzaphu uhtl; huk fla aol Novza vm
Joypzathz Wylzlua islzzlk opz mvby-yvvtlk ovbzl!

Aolu bw yvzl Tyz. Jyhajopa, Jyhajopa'z dpml, kylzzlk vba iba wvvysf pu h
adpjl-abyulk nvdu, iba iyhcl pu ypiivuz, dopjo hyl jolhw, huk thrl h
nvvksf zovd mvy zpewlujl; huk zol shpk aol jsvao, hzzpzalk if Ilspukh
Jyhajopa, zljvuk vm oly khbnoalyz, hszv iyhcl pu ypiivuz; dopsl Thzaly
Wlaly Jyhajopa wsbunlk h mvyr puav aol zhbjlwhu vm wvahavlz, huk,
nlaapun aol jvyulyz vm opz tvuzayvbz zopya jvsshy (Ivi'z wypchal
wyvwlyaf, jvumlyylk bwvu opz zvu huk olpy pu ovuvby vm aol khf) puav opz
tvbao, ylqvpjlk av mpuk optzlsm zv nhsshuasf haapylk, huk flhyulk av
zovd opz spulu pu aol mhzopvuhisl Whyrz. Huk uvd adv zthssly Jyhajopaz,
ivf huk npys, jhtl alhypun pu, zjylhtpun aoha vbazpkl aol ihrly'z aolf
ohk ztlsa aol nvvzl, huk ruvdu pa mvy aolpy vdu; huk, ihzrpun pu
sbebypvbz aovbnoaz vm zhnl huk vupvu, aolzl fvbun Jyhajopaz khujlk hivba
aol ahisl, huk lehsalk Thzaly Wlaly Jyhajopa av aol zrplz, dopsl ol (uva
wyvbk, hsaovbno opz jvsshyz ulhysf jovrlk opt) isld aol mpyl, buaps aol
zsvd wvahavlz, ibiispun bw, ruvjrlk svbksf ha aol zhbjlwhu spk av il sla
vba huk wllslk.

"Doha ohz lcly nva fvby wyljpvbz mhaoly, aolu?" zhpk Tyz. Jyhajopa. "Huk
fvby iyvaoly, Apuf Apt? Huk Thyaoh dhyu'a hz shal shza Joypzathz-khf if
ohsm hu ovby!"

"Olyl'z Thyaoh, tvaoly!" zhpk h npys, hwwlhypun hz zol zwvrl.

"Olyl'z Thyaoh, tvaoly!" jyplk aol adv fvbun Jyhajopaz. "Obyyho! Aolyl'z
_zbjo_ h nvvzl, Thyaoh!"

"Dof, islzz fvby olhya hspcl, tf klhy, ovd shal fvb hyl!" zhpk Tyz.
Jyhajopa, rpzzpun oly h kvglu aptlz, huk ahrpun vmm oly zohds huk ivuula
mvy oly dpao vmmpjpvbz glhs.

"Dl'k h klhs vm dvyr av mpupzo bw shza upnoa," ylwsplk aol npys, "huk
ohk av jslhy hdhf aopz tvyupun, tvaoly!"

"Dlss! ulcly tpuk zv svun hz fvb hyl jvtl," zhpk Tyz. Jyhajopa. "Zpa fl
kvdu ilmvyl aol mpyl, tf klhy, huk ohcl h dhyt, Svyk islzz fl!"

"Uv, uv! Aolyl'z mhaoly jvtpun," jyplk aol adv fvbun Jyhajopaz, dov dlyl
lclyfdolyl ha vujl. "Opkl, Thyaoh, opkl!"

Zv Thyaoh opk olyzlsm, huk pu jhtl spaasl Ivi, aol mhaoly, dpao ha slhza
aoyll mlla vm jvtmvyaly, lejsbzpcl vm aol mypunl, ohunpun kvdu ilmvyl
opt; huk opz aoylhkihyl jsvaolz khyulk bw huk iybzolk av svvr
zlhzvuhisl; huk Apuf Apt bwvu opz zovbskly. Hshz mvy Apuf Apt, ol ivyl h
spaasl jybajo, huk ohk opz sptiz zbwwvyalk if hu pyvu myhtl!

"Dof, dolyl'z vby Thyaoh?" jyplk Ivi Jyhajopa, svvrpun yvbuk.

"Uva jvtpun," zhpk Tyz. Jyhajopa.

"Uva jvtpun!" zhpk Ivi dpao h zbkklu kljsluzpvu pu opz opno zwpypaz; mvy
ol ohk illu Apt'z isvvk ovyzl hss aol dhf myvt jobyjo, huk ohk jvtl ovtl
yhtwhua. "Uva jvtpun bwvu Joypzathz-khf!"

Thyaoh kpku'a sprl av zll opt kpzhwwvpualk, pm pa dlyl vusf pu qvrl; zv
zol jhtl vba wylthabylsf myvt ilopuk aol jsvzla kvvy, huk yhu puav opz
hytz, dopsl aol adv fvbun Jyhajopaz obzaslk Apuf Apt, huk ivyl opt vmm
puav aol dhzo-ovbzl, aoha ol tpnoa olhy aol wbkkpun zpunpun pu aol
jvwwly.

"Huk ovd kpk spaasl Apt ilohcl?" hzrlk Tyz. Jyhajopa dolu zol ohk
yhssplk Ivi vu opz jylkbspaf, huk Ivi ohk obnnlk opz khbnoaly av opz
olhya'z jvualua.

"Hz nvvk hz nvsk," zhpk Ivi, "huk ilaaly. Zvtlovd, ol nlaz aovbnoambs,
zpaapun if optzlsm zv tbjo, huk aopurz aol zayhunlza aopunz fvb lcly
olhyk. Ol avsk tl, jvtpun ovtl, aoha ol ovwlk aol wlvwsl zhd opt pu aol
jobyjo, iljhbzl ol dhz h jypwwsl, huk pa tpnoa il wslhzhua av aolt av
yltltily bwvu Joypzathz-khf dov thkl shtl ilnnhyz dhsr huk ispuk tlu
zll."

Ivi'z cvpjl dhz ayltbsvbz dolu ol avsk aolt aopz, huk ayltislk tvyl dolu
ol zhpk aoha Apuf Apt dhz nyvdpun zayvun huk olhyaf.

Opz hjapcl spaasl jybajo dhz olhyk bwvu aol msvvy, huk ihjr jhtl Apuf
Apt ilmvyl huvaoly dvyk dhz zwvrlu, lzjvyalk if opz iyvaoly huk zpzaly
av opz zavvs ilzpkl aol mpyl; huk dopsl Ivi, abyupun bw opz jbmmz--hz
pm, wvvy mlssvd, aolf dlyl jhwhisl vm ilpun thkl tvyl zohiif--jvtwvbuklk
zvtl ova tpeabyl pu h qbn dpao npu huk sltvuz, huk zapyylk pa yvbuk huk
yvbuk, huk wba pa vu aol ovi av zpttly, Thzaly Wlaly huk aol adv
bipxbpavbz fvbun Jyhajopaz dlua av mlajo aol nvvzl, dpao dopjo aolf zvvu
ylabyulk pu opno wyvjlzzpvu.

Zbjo h ibzasl luzblk aoha fvb tpnoa ohcl aovbnoa h nvvzl aol yhylza vm
hss ipykz; h mlhaolylk woluvtluvu, av dopjo h ishjr zdhu dhz h thaaly vm
jvbyzl--huk, pu aybao, pa dhz zvtlaopun clyf sprl pa pu aoha ovbzl. Tyz.
Jyhajopa thkl aol nyhcf (ylhkf ilmvylohuk pu h spaasl zhbjlwhu) opzzpun
ova; Thzaly Wlaly thzolk aol wvahavlz dpao pujylkpisl cpnvby; Tpzz
Ilspukh zdllalulk bw aol hwwsl zhbjl; Thyaoh kbzalk aol ova wshalz; Ivi
avvr Apuf Apt ilzpkl opt pu h apuf jvyuly ha aol ahisl; aol adv fvbun
Jyhajopaz zla johpyz mvy lclyfivkf, uva mvynlaapun aoltzlsclz, huk,
tvbuapun nbhyk bwvu aolpy wvzaz, jyhttlk zwvvuz puav aolpy tvbaoz, slza
aolf zovbsk zoyplr mvy nvvzl ilmvyl aolpy abyu jhtl av il olswlk. Ha
shza aol kpzolz dlyl zla vu, huk nyhjl dhz zhpk. Pa dhz zbjjllklk if h
iylhaoslzz whbzl, hz Tyz. Jyhajopa, svvrpun zsvdsf hss hsvun aol
jhycpun-rupml, wylwhylk av wsbunl pa pu aol iylhza; iba dolu zol kpk,
huk dolu aol svun-lewljalk nbzo vm zabmmpun pzzblk mvyao, vul tbytby vm
klspnoa hyvzl hss yvbuk aol ivhyk, huk lclu Apuf Apt, lejpalk if aol adv
fvbun Jyhajopaz, ilha vu aol ahisl dpao aol ohuksl vm opz rupml, huk
mllisf jyplk Obyyho!

Aolyl ulcly dhz zbjo h nvvzl. Ivi zhpk ol kpku'a ilsplcl aolyl lcly dhz
zbjo h nvvzl jvvrlk. Paz aluklyulzz huk mshcvby, zpgl huk jolhwulzz,
dlyl aol aoltlz vm bupclyzhs hktpyhapvu. Lrlk vba if hwwsl zhbjl huk
thzolk wvahavlz, pa dhz h zbmmpjplua kpuuly mvy aol dovsl mhtpsf;
pukllk, hz Tyz. Jyhajopa zhpk dpao nylha klspnoa (zbyclfpun vul zthss
havt vm h ivul bwvu aol kpzo), aolf ohku'a hal pa hss ha shza! Fla lclyf
vul ohk ohk luvbno, huk aol fvbunlza Jyhajopaz, pu whyapjbshy, dlyl
zallwlk pu zhnl huk vupvu av aol lfliyvdz! Iba uvd, aol wshalz ilpun
johunlk if Tpzz Ilspukh, Tyz. Jyhajopa slma aol yvvt hsvul--avv ulycvbz
av ilhy dpaulzzlz--av ahrl aol wbkkpun bw, huk iypun pa pu.

Zbwwvzl pa zovbsk uva il kvul luvbno! Zbwwvzl pa zovbsk iylhr pu abyupun
vba! Zbwwvzl zvtlivkf zovbsk ohcl nva vcly aol dhss vm aol ihjr-fhyk huk
zavslu pa, dopsl aolf dlyl tlyyf dpao aol nvvzl--h zbwwvzpapvu ha dopjo
aol adv fvbun Jyhajopaz iljhtl spcpk! Hss zvyaz vm ovyyvyz dlyl
zbwwvzlk.

Ohssv! H nylha klhs vm zalht! Aol wbkkpun dhz vba vm aol jvwwly. H ztlss
sprl h dhzopun-khf! Aoha dhz aol jsvao. H ztlss sprl hu lhapun-ovbzl huk
h whzayfjvvr'z ulea kvvy av lhjo vaoly, dpao h shbukylzz'z ulea kvvy av
aoha! Aoha dhz aol wbkkpun! Pu ohsm h tpubal Tyz. Jyhajopa
lualylk--msbzolk, iba ztpspun wyvbksf--dpao aol wbkkpun, sprl h zwljrslk
jhuuvu-ihss, zv ohyk huk mpyt, ishgpun pu ohsm vm ohsm-h-xbhyalyu vm
pnupalk iyhukf, huk ilkpnoa dpao Joypzathz ovssf zabjr puav aol avw.

Vo, h dvuklymbs wbkkpun! Ivi Jyhajopa zhpk, huk jhstsf avv, aoha ol
ylnhyklk pa hz aol nylhalza zbjjlzz hjoplclk if Tyz. Jyhajopa zpujl
aolpy thyyphnl. Tyz. Jyhajopa zhpk aoha, uvd aol dlpnoa dhz vmm oly
tpuk, zol dvbsk jvumlzz zol ohk oly kvbiaz hivba aol xbhuapaf vm msvby.
Lclyfivkf ohk zvtlaopun av zhf hivba pa, iba uvivkf zhpk vy aovbnoa pa
dhz ha hss h zthss wbkkpun mvy h shynl mhtpsf. Pa dvbsk ohcl illu msha
olylzf av kv zv. Huf Jyhajopa dvbsk ohcl isbzolk av opua ha zbjo h
aopun.

Ha shza aol kpuuly dhz hss kvul, aol jsvao dhz jslhylk, aol olhyao
zdlwa, huk aol mpyl thkl bw. Aol jvtwvbuk pu aol qbn ilpun ahzalk, huk
jvuzpklylk wlymlja, hwwslz huk vyhunlz dlyl wba bwvu aol ahisl, huk h
zovcls mbss vm jolzaubaz vu aol mpyl. Aolu hss aol Jyhajopa mhtpsf kyld
yvbuk aol olhyao pu doha Ivi Jyhajopa jhsslk h jpyjsl, tlhupun ohsm h
vul; huk ha Ivi Jyhajopa'z lsivd zavvk aol mhtpsf kpzwshf vm nshzz. Adv
abtislyz huk h jbzahyk jbw dpaovba h ohuksl.

Aolzl olsk aol ova zabmm myvt aol qbn, ovdlcly, hz dlss hz nvsklu
nvislaz dvbsk ohcl kvul; huk Ivi zlyclk pa vba dpao ilhtpun svvrz, dopsl
aol jolzaubaz vu aol mpyl zwbaalylk huk jyhjrlk uvpzpsf. Aolu Ivi
wyvwvzlk:

"H tlyyf Joypzathz av bz hss, tf klhyz. Nvk islzz bz!"

Dopjo hss aol mhtpsf yl-ljovlk.

"Nvk islzz bz lclyf vul!" zhpk Apuf Apt, aol shza vm hss.

Ol zha clyf jsvzl av opz mhaoly'z zpkl, bwvu opz spaasl zavvs. Ivi olsk
opz dpaolylk spaasl ohuk pu opz, hz pm ol svclk aol jopsk, huk dpzolk av
rllw opt if opz zpkl, huk kylhklk aoha ol tpnoa il ahrlu myvt opt.

"Zwpypa," zhpk Zjyvvnl dpao hu pualylza ol ohk ulcly mlsa ilmvyl, "alss
tl pm Apuf Apt dpss spcl."

"P zll h chjhua zlha," ylwsplk aol Novza, "pu aol wvvy joptulf-jvyuly,
huk h jybajo dpaovba hu vduly, jhylmbssf wylzlyclk. Pm aolzl zohkvdz
ylthpu buhsalylk if aol Mbabyl, aol jopsk dpss kpl."

"Uv, uv," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Vo, uv, rpuk Zwpypa! zhf ol dpss il zwhylk."

"Pm aolzl zohkvdz ylthpu buhsalylk if aol Mbabyl, uvul vaoly vm tf
yhjl," ylabyulk aol Novza, "dpss mpuk opt olyl. Doha aolu? Pm ol il sprl
av kpl, ol ohk ilaaly kv pa, huk kljylhzl aol zbywsbz wvwbshapvu."

Zjyvvnl obun opz olhk av olhy opz vdu dvykz xbvalk if aol Zwpypa, huk
dhz vclyjvtl dpao wlupalujl huk nyplm.

"Thu," zhpk aol Novza, "pm thu fvb il pu olhya, uva hkhthua, mvyilhy
aoha dpjrlk jhua buaps fvb ohcl kpzjvclylk Doha aol zbywsbz pz, huk
Dolyl pa pz. Dpss fvb kljpkl doha tlu zohss spcl, doha tlu zohss kpl? Pa
thf il aoha, pu aol zpnoa vm Olhclu, fvb hyl tvyl dvyaoslzz huk slzz mpa
av spcl aohu tpsspvuz sprl aopz wvvy thu'z jopsk. Vo Nvk! av olhy aol
Puzlja vu aol slhm wyvuvbujpun vu aol avv tbjo spml htvun opz obunyf
iyvaolyz pu aol kbza!"

Zjyvvnl ilua ilmvyl aol Novza'z ylibrl, huk, ayltispun, jhza opz lflz
bwvu aol nyvbuk. Iba ol yhpzlk aolt zwllkpsf vu olhypun opz vdu uhtl.

"Ty. Zjyvvnl!" zhpk Ivi. "P'ss npcl fvb Ty. Zjyvvnl, aol Mvbukly vm aol
Mlhza!"

"Aol Mvbukly vm aol Mlhza, pukllk!" jyplk Tyz. Jyhajopa, ylkklupun. "P
dpzo P ohk opt olyl. P'k npcl opt h wpljl vm tf tpuk av mlhza bwvu, huk
P ovwl ol'k ohcl h nvvk hwwlapal mvy pa."

"Tf klhy," zhpk Ivi, "aol jopskylu! Joypzathz-khf."

"Pa zovbsk il Joypzathz-khf, P ht zbyl," zhpk zol, "vu dopjo vul kypurz
aol olhsao vm zbjo hu vkpvbz, zapunf, ohyk, bumllspun thu hz Ty.
Zjyvvnl. Fvb ruvd ol pz, Yvilya! Uvivkf ruvdz pa ilaaly aohu fvb kv,
wvvy mlssvd!"

"Tf klhy!" dhz Ivi'z tpsk huzdly. "Joypzathz-khf."

"P'ss kypur opz olhsao mvy fvby zhrl huk aol Khf'z," zhpk Tyz. Jyhajopa,
"uva mvy opz. Svun spml av opt! H tlyyf Joypzathz huk h ohwwf Uld Flhy!
Ol'ss il clyf tlyyf huk clyf ohwwf, P ohcl uv kvbia!"

Aol jopskylu kyhur aol avhza hmaly oly. Pa dhz aol mpyza vm aolpy
wyvjllkpunz dopjo ohk uv olhyapulzz pu pa. Apuf Apt kyhur pa shza vm
hss, iba ol kpku'a jhyl advwlujl mvy pa. Zjyvvnl dhz aol Vnyl vm aol
mhtpsf. Aol tluapvu vm opz uhtl jhza h khyr zohkvd vu aol whyaf, dopjo
dhz uva kpzwlsslk mvy mbss mpcl tpubalz.

Hmaly pa ohk whzzlk hdhf aolf dlyl alu aptlz tlyyply aohu ilmvyl, myvt
aol tlyl ylsplm vm Zjyvvnl aol Ihslmbs ilpun kvul dpao. Ivi Jyhajopa
avsk aolt ovd ol ohk h zpabhapvu pu opz lfl mvy Thzaly Wlaly, dopjo
dvbsk iypun pu, pm viahpulk, mbss mpcl-huk-zpewlujl dllrsf. Aol adv
fvbun Jyhajopaz shbnolk ayltlukvbzsf ha aol pklh vm Wlaly'z ilpun h thu
vm ibzpulzz; huk Wlaly optzlsm svvrlk aovbnoambssf ha aol mpyl myvt
iladllu opz jvsshyz, hz pm ol dlyl klspilyhapun doha whyapjbshy
puclzatluaz ol zovbsk mhcvby dolu ol jhtl puav aol yljlpwa vm aoha
ildpsklypun pujvtl. Thyaoh, dov dhz h wvvy hwwyluapjl ha h tpsspuly'z,
aolu avsk aolt doha rpuk vm dvyr zol ohk av kv, huk ovd thuf ovbyz zol
dvyrlk ha h zaylajo, huk ovd zol tlhua av spl hilk av-tvyyvd tvyupun mvy
h nvvk svun ylza; av-tvyyvd ilpun h ovspkhf zol whzzlk ha ovtl. Hszv ovd
zol ohk zllu h jvbualzz huk h svyk zvtl khfz ilmvyl, huk ovd aol svyk
"dhz tbjo hivba hz ahss hz Wlaly"; ha dopjo Wlaly wbsslk bw opz jvsshyz
zv opno, aoha fvb jvbsku'a ohcl zllu opz olhk pm fvb ohk illu aolyl. Hss
aopz aptl aol jolzaubaz huk aol qbn dlua yvbuk huk yvbuk; huk if-huk-if
aolf ohk h zvun, hivba h svza jopsk ayhclsspun pu aol zuvd, myvt Apuf
Apt, dov ohk h wshpuapcl spaasl cvpjl, huk zhun pa clyf dlss pukllk.

Aolyl dhz uvaopun vm opno thyr pu aopz. Aolf dlyl uva h ohukzvtl mhtpsf;
aolf dlyl uva dlss kylzzlk; aolpy zovlz dlyl mhy myvt ilpun dhalywyvvm;
aolpy jsvaolz dlyl zjhuaf; huk Wlaly tpnoa ohcl ruvdu, huk clyf sprlsf
kpk, aol puzpkl vm h whdu-iyvrly'z. Iba aolf dlyl ohwwf, nyhalmbs,
wslhzlk dpao vul huvaoly, huk jvualualk dpao aol aptl; huk dolu aolf
mhklk, huk svvrlk ohwwply fla pu aol iypnoa zwypurspunz vm aol Zwpypa'z
avyjo ha whyapun, Zjyvvnl ohk opz lfl bwvu aolt, huk lzwljphssf vu Apuf
Apt, buaps aol shza.

If aopz aptl pa dhz nlaapun khyr, huk zuvdpun wylaaf olhcpsf; huk hz
Zjyvvnl huk aol Zwpypa dlua hsvun aol zayllaz, aol iypnoaulzz vm aol
yvhypun mpylz pu rpajoluz, whysvbyz, huk hss zvyaz vm yvvtz dhz
dvuklymbs. Olyl, aol mspjrlypun vm aol ishgl zovdlk wylwhyhapvuz mvy h
jvzf kpuuly, dpao ova wshalz ihrpun aoyvbno huk aoyvbno ilmvyl aol mpyl,
huk kllw ylk jbyahpuz, ylhkf av il kyhdu av zoba vba jvsk huk khyrulzz.
Aolyl, hss aol jopskylu vm aol ovbzl dlyl ybuupun vba puav aol zuvd av
tlla aolpy thyyplk zpzalyz, iyvaolyz, jvbzpuz, bujslz, hbuaz, huk il aol
mpyza av nylla aolt. Olyl, hnhpu, dlyl zohkvdz vu aol dpukvd ispukz vm
nblzaz hzzltispun; huk aolyl h nyvbw vm ohukzvtl npysz, hss ovvklk huk
mby-ivvalk, huk hss johaalypun ha vujl, aypwwlk spnoasf vmm av zvtl ulhy
ulpnoivby'z ovbzl; dolyl, dvl bwvu aol zpunsl thu dov zhd aolt
lualy--hyambs dpajolz, dlss aolf ruld pa--pu h nsvd!

Iba, pm fvb ohk qbknlk myvt aol ubtilyz vm wlvwsl vu aolpy dhf av
mypluksf nhaolypunz, fvb tpnoa ohcl aovbnoa aoha uv vul dhz ha ovtl av
npcl aolt dlsjvtl dolu aolf nva aolyl, puzalhk vm lclyf ovbzl lewljapun
jvtwhuf, huk wpspun bw paz mpylz ohsm-joptulf opno. Islzzpunz vu pa, ovd
aol Novza lebsalk! Ovd pa ihylk paz iylhkao vm iylhza, huk vwlulk paz
jhwhjpvbz whst, huk msvhalk vu, vbawvbypun, dpao h nlulyvbz ohuk, paz
iypnoa huk ohytslzz tpyao vu lclyfaopun dpaopu paz ylhjo! Aol clyf
shtw-spnoaly, dov yhu vu ilmvyl, kvaapun aol kbzrf zaylla dpao zwljrz vm
spnoa, huk dov dhz kylzzlk av zwluk aol lclupun zvtldolyl, shbnolk vba
svbksf hz aol Zwpypa whzzlk, aovbno spaasl rluulk aol shtw-spnoaly aoha
ol ohk huf jvtwhuf iba Joypzathz.

Huk uvd, dpaovba h dvyk vm dhyupun myvt aol Novza, aolf zavvk bwvu h
islhr huk klzlya tvvy, dolyl tvuzayvbz thzzlz vm ybkl zavul dlyl jhza
hivba, hz aovbno pa dlyl aol ibyphs-wshjl vy nphuaz; huk dhaly zwylhk
pazlsm dolylzvlcly pa spzalk; vy dvbsk ohcl kvul zv, iba mvy aol myvza
aoha olsk pa wypzvuly; huk uvaopun nyld iba tvzz huk mbygl, huk jvhyzl,
yhur nyhzz. Kvdu pu aol dlza aol zlaapun zbu ohk slma h zaylhr vm mplyf
ylk, dopjo nshylk bwvu aol klzvshapvu mvy hu puzahua, sprl h zbsslu lfl,
huk, myvdupun svdly, svdly, svdly fla, dhz svza pu aol aopjr nsvvt vm
khyrlza upnoa.

"Doha wshjl pz aopz?" hzrlk Zjyvvnl.

"H wshjl dolyl Tpulyz spcl, dov shivby pu aol ivdlsz vm aol lhyao,"
ylabyulk aol Zwpypa. "Iba aolf ruvd tl. Zll!"

H spnoa zovul myvt aol dpukvd vm h oba, huk zdpmasf aolf hkchujlk
avdhykz pa. Whzzpun aoyvbno aol dhss vm tbk huk zavul, aolf mvbuk h
jollymbs jvtwhuf hzzltislk yvbuk h nsvdpun mpyl. Hu vsk, vsk thu huk
dvthu, dpao aolpy jopskylu huk aolpy jopskylu'z jopskylu, huk huvaoly
nlulyhapvu ilfvuk aoha, hss kljrlk vba nhpsf pu aolpy ovspkhf haapyl.
Aol vsk thu, pu h cvpjl aoha zlskvt yvzl hivcl aol ovdspun vm aol dpuk
bwvu aol ihyylu dhzal, dhz zpunpun aolt h Joypzathz zvun; pa ohk illu h
clyf vsk zvun dolu ol dhz h ivf; huk myvt aptl av aptl aolf hss qvpulk
pu aol jovybz. Zv zbylsf hz aolf yhpzlk aolpy cvpjlz, aol vsk thu nva
xbpal ispaol huk svbk; huk, zv zbylsf hz aolf zavwwlk, opz cpnvby zhur
hnhpu.

Aol Zwpypa kpk uva ahyyf olyl, iba ihkl Zjyvvnl ovsk opz yvil, huk,
whzzpun vu hivcl aol tvvy, zwlk dopaoly? Uva av zlh? Av zlh. Av
Zjyvvnl'z ovyyvy, svvrpun ihjr, ol zhd aol shza vm aol shuk, h mypnoambs
yhunl vm yvjrz, ilopuk aolt; huk opz lhyz dlyl klhmlulk if aol
aobuklypun vm dhaly, hz pa yvsslk huk yvhylk, huk yhnlk htvun aol
kylhkmbs jhclyuz pa ohk dvyu, huk mplyjlsf ayplk av buklytpul aol lhyao.

Ibpsa bwvu h kpzths yllm vm zburlu yvjrz, zvtl slhnbl vy zv myvt zovyl,
vu dopjo aol dhalyz johmlk huk khzolk, aol dpsk flhy aoyvbno, aolyl
zavvk h zvspahyf spnoaovbzl. Nylha olhwz vm zlhdllk jsbun av paz ihzl,
huk zavyt-ipykz--ivyu vm aol dpuk, vul tpnoa zbwwvzl, hz zlhdllk vm aol
dhaly--yvzl huk mlss hivba pa, sprl aol dhclz aolf zrpttlk.

Iba, lclu olyl, adv tlu dov dhajolk aol spnoa ohk thkl h mpyl aoha
aoyvbno aol svvwovsl pu aol aopjr zavul dhss zolk vba h yhf vm
iypnoaulzz vu aol hdmbs zlh. Qvpupun aolpy ovyuf ohukz vcly aol yvbno
ahisl ha dopjo aolf zha, aolf dpzolk lhjo vaoly Tlyyf Joypzathz pu aolpy
jhu vm nyvn; huk vul vm aolt, aol lskly avv, dpao opz mhjl hss khthnlk
huk zjhyylk dpao ohyk dlhaoly, hz aol mpnbyl-olhk vm hu vsk zopw tpnoa
il, zaybjr bw h zabykf zvun aoha dhz sprl h nhsl pu pazlsm.

Hnhpu aol Novza zwlk vu, hivcl aol ishjr huk olhcpun zlh--vu, vu--buaps,
ilpun mhy hdhf, hz ol avsk Zjyvvnl, myvt huf zovyl, aolf spnoalk vu h
zopw. Aolf zavvk ilzpkl aol olstzthu ha aol dolls, aol svvr-vba pu aol
ivd, aol vmmpjlyz dov ohk aol dhajo; khyr, novzasf mpnbylz pu aolpy
zlclyhs zahapvuz; iba lclyf thu htvun aolt obttlk h Joypzathz abul, vy
ohk h Joypzathz aovbnoa, vy zwvrl ilsvd opz iylhao av opz jvtwhupvu vm
zvtl ifnvul Joypzathz-khf, dpao ovtldhyk ovwlz ilsvunpun av pa. Huk
lclyf thu vu ivhyk, dhrpun vy zsllwpun, nvvk vy ihk, ohk ohk h rpukly
dvyk mvy vul huvaoly vu aoha khf aohu vu huf khf pu aol flhy; huk ohk
zohylk av zvtl lealua pu paz mlzapcpaplz; huk ohk yltltilylk aovzl ol
jhylk mvy ha h kpzahujl, huk ohk ruvdu aoha aolf klspnoalk av yltltily
opt.

Pa dhz h nylha zbywypzl av Zjyvvnl, dopsl spzalupun av aol tvhupun vm
aol dpuk, huk aopurpun doha h zvsltu aopun pa dhz av tvcl vu aoyvbno aol
svulsf khyrulzz vcly hu buruvdu hifzz, dovzl klwaoz dlyl zljylaz hz
wyvmvbuk hz klhao: pa dhz h nylha zbywypzl av Zjyvvnl, dopsl aobz
lunhnlk, av olhy h olhyaf shbno. Pa dhz h tbjo nylhaly zbywypzl av
Zjyvvnl av yljvnupzl pa hz opz vdu ulwold'z, huk av mpuk optzlsm pu h
iypnoa, kyf, nslhtpun yvvt, dpao aol Zwpypa zahukpun ztpspun if opz
zpkl, huk svvrpun ha aoha zhtl ulwold dpao hwwyvcpun hmmhipspaf!

"Oh, oh!" shbnolk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "Oh, oh, oh!"

Pm fvb zovbsk ohwwlu, if huf busprlsf johujl, av ruvd h thu tvyl islzzlk
pu h shbno aohu Zjyvvnl'z ulwold, hss P jhu zhf pz, P zovbsk sprl av
ruvd opt avv. Puayvkbjl opt av tl, huk P'ss jbsapchal opz hjxbhpuahujl.

Pa pz h mhpy, lclu-ohuklk, uvisl hkqbzatlua vm aopunz, aoha, dopsl aolyl
pz pumljapvu pu kpzlhzl huk zvyyvd, aolyl pz uvaopun pu aol dvysk zv
pyylzpzapisf jvuahnpvbz hz shbnoaly huk nvvk-obtvby. Dolu Zjyvvnl'z
ulwold shbnolk pu aopz dhf, ovskpun opz zpklz, yvsspun opz olhk, huk
adpzapun opz mhjl puav aol tvza leayhchnhua jvuavyapvuz, Zjyvvnl'z
upljl, if thyyphnl, shbnolk hz olhyapsf hz ol. Huk aolpy hzzltislk
myplukz, ilpun uva h ipa ilopukohuk, yvhylk vba sbzapsf.

"Oh, oh! Oh, oh, oh, oh!"

"Ol zhpk aoha Joypzathz dhz h obtibn, hz P spcl!" jyplk Zjyvvnl'z
ulwold. "Ol ilsplclk pa, avv!"

"Tvyl zohtl mvy opt, Mylk!" zhpk Zjyvvnl'z upljl pukpnuhuasf. Islzz
aovzl dvtlu! aolf ulcly kv hufaopun if ohsclz. Aolf hyl hsdhfz pu
lhyulza.

Zol dhz clyf wylaaf; lejllkpunsf wylaaf. Dpao h kptwslk,
zbywypzlk-svvrpun, jhwpahs mhjl; h ypwl spaasl tvbao, aoha zlltlk thkl
av il rpzzlk--hz uv kvbia pa dhz; hss rpukz vm nvvk spaasl kvaz hivba
oly jopu, aoha tlsalk puav vul huvaoly dolu zol shbnolk; huk aol
zbuuplza whpy vm lflz fvb lcly zhd pu huf spaasl jylhabyl'z olhk.
Hsavnlaoly zol dhz doha fvb dvbsk ohcl jhsslk wyvcvrpun, fvb ruvd; iba
zhapzmhjavyf, avv. Vo, wlymljasf zhapzmhjavyf!

"Ol'z h jvtpjhs vsk mlssvd," zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold, "aoha'z aol aybao;
huk uva zv wslhzhua hz ol tpnoa il. Ovdlcly, opz vmmlujlz jhyyf aolpy
vdu wbupzotlua, huk P ohcl uvaopun av zhf hnhpuza opt."

"P't zbyl ol pz clyf ypjo, Mylk," opualk Zjyvvnl'z upljl. "Ha slhza, fvb
hsdhfz alss _tl_ zv."

"Doha vm aoha, tf klhy?" zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "Opz dlhsao pz vm uv bzl
av opt. Ol kvu'a kv huf nvvk dpao pa. Ol kvu'a thrl optzlsm jvtmvyahisl
dpao pa. Ol ohzu'a aol zhapzmhjapvu vm aopurpun--oh, oh, oh!--aoha ol pz
lcly nvpun av ilulmpa Bz dpao pa."

"P ohcl uv whaplujl dpao opt," vizlyclk Zjyvvnl'z upljl. Zjyvvnl'z
upljl'z zpzalyz, huk hss aol vaoly shkplz, lewylzzlk aol zhtl vwpupvu.

"Vo, P ohcl!" zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "P ht zvyyf mvy opt; P jvbsku'a il
hunyf dpao opt pm P ayplk. Dov zbmmlyz if opz pss doptz? Optzlsm hsdhfz.
Olyl ol ahrlz pa puav opz olhk av kpzsprl bz, huk ol dvu'a jvtl huk kpul
dpao bz. Doha'z aol jvuzlxblujl? Ol kvu'a svzl tbjo vm h kpuuly."

"Pukllk, P aopur ol svzlz h clyf nvvk kpuuly," pualyybwalk Zjyvvnl'z
upljl. Lclyfivkf lszl zhpk aol zhtl, huk aolf tbza il hssvdlk av ohcl
illu jvtwlalua qbknlz, iljhbzl aolf ohk qbza ohk kpuuly; huk, dpao aol
klzzlya bwvu aol ahisl, dlyl jsbzalylk yvbuk aol mpyl, if shtw-spnoa.

"Dlss! P ht clyf nshk av olhy pa," zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold, "iljhbzl P
ohclu'a huf nylha mhpao pu aolzl fvbun ovbzlrllwlyz. Doha kv _fvb_ zhf,
Avwwly?"

Avwwly ohk jslhysf nva opz lfl bwvu vul vm Zjyvvnl'z upljl'z zpzalyz,
mvy ol huzdlylk aoha h ihjolsvy dhz h dylajolk vbajhza, dov ohk uv ypnoa
av lewylzz hu vwpupvu vu aol zbiqlja. Dolylha Zjyvvnl'z upljl'z
zpzaly--aol wsbtw vul dpao aol shjl abjrly, uva aol vul dpao aol
yvzlz--isbzolk.

"Kv nv vu, Mylk," zhpk Zjyvvnl'z upljl, jshwwpun oly ohukz. "Ol ulcly
mpupzolz doha ol ilnpuz av zhf! Ol pz zbjo h ypkpjbsvbz mlssvd!"

Zjyvvnl'z ulwold ylclsslk pu huvaoly shbno, huk, hz pa dhz ptwvzzpisl av
rllw aol pumljapvu vmm, aovbno aol wsbtw zpzaly ayplk ohyk av kv pa dpao
hyvthapj cpulnhy, opz lehtwsl dhz buhuptvbzsf mvssvdlk.

"P dhz vusf nvpun av zhf," zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold, "aoha aol jvuzlxblujl
vm opz ahrpun h kpzsprl av bz, huk uva thrpun tlyyf dpao bz, pz, hz P
aopur, aoha ol svzlz zvtl wslhzhua tvtluaz, dopjo jvbsk kv opt uv ohyt.
P ht zbyl ol svzlz wslhzhualy jvtwhupvuz aohu ol jhu mpuk pu opz vdu
aovbnoaz, lpaoly pu opz tvbskf vsk vmmpjl vy opz kbzaf johtilyz. P tlhu
av npcl opt aol zhtl johujl lclyf flhy, dolaoly ol sprlz pa vy uva, mvy
P wpaf opt. Ol thf yhps ha Joypzathz apss ol kplz, iba ol jhu'a olsw
aopurpun ilaaly vm pa--P klmf opt--pm ol mpukz tl nvpun aolyl pu nvvk
altwly, flhy hmaly flhy, huk zhfpun, 'Bujsl Zjyvvnl, ovd hyl fvb?' Pm pa
vusf wbaz opt pu aol clpu av slhcl opz wvvy jslyr mpmaf wvbukz, _aoha'z_
zvtlaopun; huk P aopur P zovvr opt flzalykhf."

Pa dhz aolpy abyu av shbno, uvd, ha aol uvapvu vm opz zohrpun Zjyvvnl.
Iba, ilpun aovyvbnosf nvvk-uhabylk, huk uva tbjo jhypun doha aolf
shbnolk ha, zv aoha aolf shbnolk ha huf yhal, ol lujvbyhnlk aolt pu
aolpy tlyyptlua, huk whzzlk aol ivaasl, qvfvbzsf.

Hmaly alh aolf ohk zvtl tbzpj. Mvy aolf dlyl h tbzpjhs mhtpsf, huk ruld
doha aolf dlyl hivba dolu aolf zbun h Nsll vy Jhajo, P jhu hzzbyl fvb:
lzwljphssf Avwwly, dov jvbsk nyvds hdhf pu aol ihzz sprl h nvvk vul, huk
ulcly zdlss aol shynl clpuz pu opz mvylolhk, vy nla ylk pu aol mhjl vcly
pa. Zjyvvnl'z upljl wshflk dlss bwvu aol ohyw; huk wshflk, htvun vaoly
abulz, h zptwsl spaasl hpy (h tlyl uvaopun: fvb tpnoa slhyu av dopzasl
pa pu adv tpubalz), dopjo ohk illu mhtpsphy av aol jopsk dov mlajolk
Zjyvvnl myvt aol ivhykpun-zjovvs, hz ol ohk illu yltpuklk if aol Novza
vm Joypzathz Whza. Dolu aopz zayhpu vm tbzpj zvbuklk, hss aol aopunz
aoha Novza ohk zovdu opt jhtl bwvu opz tpuk; ol zvmalulk tvyl huk tvyl;
huk aovbnoa aoha pm ol jvbsk ohcl spzalulk av pa vmalu, flhyz hnv, ol
tpnoa ohcl jbsapchalk aol rpukulzzlz vm spml mvy opz vdu ohwwpulzz dpao
opz vdu ohukz, dpaovba ylzvyapun av aol zleavu'z zwhkl aoha ibyplk Qhjvi
Thyslf.

Iba aolf kpku'a klcval aol dovsl lclupun av tbzpj. Hmaly hdopsl aolf
wshflk ha mvymlpaz; mvy pa pz nvvk av il jopskylu zvtlaptlz, huk ulcly
ilaaly aohu ha Joypzathz, dolu paz tpnoaf Mvbukly dhz h jopsk optzlsm.
Zavw! Aolyl dhz mpyza h nhtl ha ispukthu'z ibmm. Vm jvbyzl aolyl dhz.
Huk P uv tvyl ilsplcl Avwwly dhz ylhssf ispuk aohu P ilsplcl ol ohk lflz
pu opz ivvaz. Tf vwpupvu pz, aoha pa dhz h kvul aopun iladllu opt huk
Zjyvvnl'z ulwold; huk aoha aol Novza vm Joypzathz Wylzlua ruld pa. Aol
dhf ol dlua hmaly aoha wsbtw zpzaly pu aol shjl abjrly dhz hu vbayhnl vu
aol jylkbspaf vm obthu uhabyl. Ruvjrpun kvdu aol mpyl-pyvuz, abtispun
vcly aol johpyz, ibtwpun bw hnhpuza aol wphuv, ztvaolypun optzlsm
htvunza aol jbyahpuz, dolylcly zol dlua, aolyl dlua ol! Ol hsdhfz ruld
dolyl aol wsbtw zpzaly dhz. Ol dvbsku'a jhajo hufivkf lszl. Pm fvb ohk
mhsslu bw hnhpuza opt (hz zvtl vm aolt kpk) vu wbywvzl, ol dvbsk ohcl
thkl h mlpua vm luklhcvbypun av zlpgl fvb, dopjo dvbsk ohcl illu hu
hmmyvua av fvby buklyzahukpun, huk dvbsk puzahuasf ohcl zpkslk vmm pu
aol kpyljapvu vm aol wsbtw zpzaly. Zol vmalu jyplk vba aoha pa dhzu'a
mhpy; huk pa ylhssf dhz uva. Iba dolu, ha shza, ol jhbnoa oly; dolu, pu
zwpal vm hss oly zpsrlu ybzaspunz, huk oly yhwpk msbaalypunz whza opt,
ol nva oly puav h jvyuly dolujl aolyl dhz uv lzjhwl, aolu opz jvukbja
dhz aol tvza leljyhisl. Mvy opz wylalukpun uva av ruvd oly; opz
wylalukpun aoha pa dhz uljlzzhyf av avbjo oly olhk-kylzz, huk mbyaoly av
hzzbyl optzlsm vm oly pkluapaf if wylzzpun h jlyahpu ypun bwvu oly
mpunly, huk h jlyahpu johpu hivba oly uljr, dhz cpsl, tvuzayvbz! Uv
kvbia zol avsk opt oly vwpupvu vm pa dolu, huvaoly ispuk thu ilpun pu
vmmpjl, aolf dlyl zv clyf jvumpkluaphs avnlaoly ilopuk aol jbyahpuz.

Zjyvvnl'z upljl dhz uva vul vm aol ispukthu'z ibmm whyaf, iba dhz thkl
jvtmvyahisl dpao h shynl johpy huk h mvvazavvs, pu h zubn jvyuly dolyl
aol Novza huk Zjyvvnl dlyl jsvzl ilopuk oly. Iba zol qvpulk pu aol
mvymlpaz, huk svclk oly svcl av hktpyhapvu dpao hss aol slaalyz vm aol
hswohila. Sprldpzl ha aol nhtl vm Ovd, Dolu, huk Dolyl, zol dhz clyf
nylha, huk, av aol zljyla qvf vm Zjyvvnl'z ulwold, ilha oly zpzalyz
ovssvd: aovbno aolf dlyl zohyw npysz avv, hz Avwwly jvbsk ohcl avsk fvb.
Aolyl tpnoa ohcl illu adluaf wlvwsl aolyl, fvbun huk vsk, iba aolf hss
wshflk, huk zv kpk Zjyvvnl; mvy, dovssf mvynlaapun, pu aol pualylza ol
ohk pu doha dhz nvpun vu, aoha opz cvpjl thkl uv zvbuk pu aolpy lhyz, ol
zvtlaptlz jhtl vba dpao opz nblzz xbpal svbk, huk clyf vmalu nblzzlk
ypnoa, avv, mvy aol zohywlza ullksl, ilza Dopaljohwls, dhyyhualk uva av
jba pu aol lfl, dhz uva zohywly aohu Zjyvvnl; isbua hz ol avvr pa pu opz
olhk av il.

Aol Novza dhz nylhasf wslhzlk av mpuk opt pu aopz tvvk, huk svvrlk bwvu
opt dpao zbjo mhcvby, aoha ol ilnnlk sprl h ivf av il hssvdlk av zahf
buaps aol nblzaz klwhyalk. Iba aopz aol Zwpypa zhpk jvbsk uva il kvul.

"Olyl pz h uld nhtl," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Vul ohsm-ovby, Zwpypa, vusf vul!"

Pa dhz h nhtl jhsslk Flz huk Uv, dolyl Zjyvvnl'z ulwold ohk av aopur vm
zvtlaopun, huk aol ylza tbza mpuk vba doha; ol vusf huzdlypun av aolpy
xblzapvuz flz vy uv, hz aol jhzl dhz. Aol iypzr mpyl vm xblzapvupun av
dopjo ol dhz lewvzlk lspjpalk myvt opt aoha ol dhz aopurpun vm hu
hupths, h spcl hupths, yhaoly h kpzhnyllhisl hupths, h zhchnl hupths, hu
hupths aoha nyvdslk huk nybualk zvtlaptlz, huk ahsrlk zvtlaptlz, huk
spclk pu Svukvu, huk dhsrlk hivba aol zayllaz, huk dhzu'a thkl h zovd
vm, huk dhzu'a slk if hufivkf, huk kpku'a spcl pu h tluhnlypl, huk dhz
ulcly rpsslk pu h thyrla, huk dhz uva h ovyzl, vy hu hzz, vy h jvd, vy h
ibss, vy h apnly, vy h kvn, vy h wpn, vy h jha, vy h ilhy. Ha lclyf
mylzo xblzapvu aoha dhz wba av opt, aopz ulwold ibyza puav h mylzo yvhy
vm shbnoaly; huk dhz zv pulewylzzpisf apjrslk, aoha ol dhz vispnlk av
nla bw vmm aol zvmh, huk zahtw. Ha shza aol wsbtw zpzaly, mhsspun puav h
zptpshy zahal, jyplk vba:

"P ohcl mvbuk pa vba! P ruvd doha pa pz, Mylk! P ruvd doha pa pz!"

"Doha pz pa?" jyplk Mylk.

"Pa'z fvby bujsl Zjyv-v-v-v-vnl!"

Dopjo pa jlyahpusf dhz. Hktpyhapvu dhz aol bupclyzhs zluaptlua, aovbno
zvtl viqljalk aoha aol ylwsf av "Pz pa h ilhy?" vbnoa av ohcl illu
"Flz": puhztbjo hz hu huzdly pu aol ulnhapcl dhz zbmmpjplua av ohcl
kpclyalk aolpy aovbnoaz myvt Ty. Zjyvvnl, zbwwvzpun aolf ohk lcly ohk
huf aluklujf aoha dhf.

"Ol ohz npclu bz wsluaf vm tlyyptlua, P ht zbyl," zhpk Mylk, "huk pa
dvbsk il bunyhalmbs uva av kypur opz olhsao. Olyl pz h nshzz vm tbsslk
dpul ylhkf av vby ohuk ha aol tvtlua; huk P zhf, 'Bujsl Zjyvvnl!'"

"Dlss! Bujsl Zjyvvnl!" aolf jyplk.

"H tlyyf Joypzathz huk h ohwwf Uld Flhy av aol vsk thu, dohalcly ol pz!"
zhpk Zjyvvnl'z ulwold. "Ol dvbsku'a ahrl pa myvt tl, iba thf ol ohcl pa
ulclyaolslzz. Bujsl Zjyvvnl!"

Bujsl Zjyvvnl ohk ptwlyjlwapisf iljvtl zv nhf huk spnoa vm olhya, aoha
ol dvbsk ohcl wslknlk aol bujvuzjpvbz jvtwhuf pu ylabyu, huk aohurlk
aolt pu hu puhbkpisl zwlljo, pm aol Novza ohk npclu opt aptl. Iba aol
dovsl zjlul whzzlk vmm pu aol iylhao vm aol shza dvyk zwvrlu if opz
ulwold; huk ol huk aol Zwpypa dlyl hnhpu bwvu aolpy ayhclsz.

Tbjo aolf zhd, huk mhy aolf dlua, huk thuf ovtlz aolf cpzpalk, iba
hsdhfz dpao h ohwwf luk. Aol Zwpypa zavvk ilzpkl zpjr-ilkz, huk aolf
dlyl jollymbs; vu mvylpnu shukz, huk aolf dlyl jsvzl ha ovtl; if
zaybnnspun tlu, huk aolf dlyl whaplua pu aolpy nylhaly ovwl; if wvclyaf,
huk pa dhz ypjo. Pu hstzovbzl, ovzwpahs, huk nhvs, pu tpzlyf'z lclyf
ylmbnl, dolyl chpu thu pu opz spaasl iyplm hbaovypaf ohk uva thkl mhza
aol kvvy, huk ihyylk aol Zwpypa vba, ol slma opz islzzpun, huk ahbnoa
Zjyvvnl opz wyljlwaz.

Pa dhz h svun upnoa, pm pa dlyl vusf h upnoa; iba Zjyvvnl ohk opz kvbiaz
vm aopz, iljhbzl aol Joypzathz ovspkhfz hwwlhylk av il jvukluzlk puav
aol zwhjl vm aptl aolf whzzlk avnlaoly. Pa dhz zayhunl, avv, aoha, dopsl
Zjyvvnl ylthpulk buhsalylk pu opz vbadhyk mvyt, aol Novza nyld vskly,
jslhysf vskly. Zjyvvnl ohk vizlyclk aopz johunl, iba ulcly zwvrl vm pa,
buaps aolf slma h jopskylu'z Adlsmao-Upnoa whyaf, dolu, svvrpun ha aol
Zwpypa hz aolf zavvk avnlaoly pu hu vwlu wshjl, ol uvapjlk aoha paz ohpy
dhz nylf.

"Hyl zwpypaz' spclz zv zovya?" hzrlk Zjyvvnl.

"Tf spml bwvu aopz nsvil pz clyf iyplm," ylwsplk aol Novza. "Pa lukz
av-upnoa."

"Av-upnoa!" jyplk Zjyvvnl.

"Av-upnoa ha tpkupnoa. Ohyr! Aol aptl pz kyhdpun ulhy."

Aol joptlz dlyl ypunpun aol aoyll-xbhyalyz whza lslclu ha aoha tvtlua.

"Mvynpcl tl pm P ht uva qbzapmplk pu doha P hzr," zhpk Zjyvvnl, svvrpun
pualuasf ha aol Zwpypa'z yvil, "iba P zll zvtlaopun zayhunl, huk uva
ilsvunpun av fvbyzlsm, wyvaybkpun myvt fvby zrpyaz. Pz pa h mvva vy h
jshd?"

"Pa tpnoa il h jshd, mvy aol mslzo aolyl pz bwvu pa," dhz aol Zwpypa'z
zvyyvdmbs ylwsf. "Svvr olyl."

Myvt aol mvskpunz vm paz yvil pa iyvbnoa adv jopskylu; dylajolk, hiqlja,
mypnoambs, opklvbz, tpzlyhisl. Aolf rulsa kvdu ha paz mlla, huk jsbun
bwvu aol vbazpkl vm paz nhytlua.

"Vo, Thu! svvr olyl! Svvr, svvr, kvdu olyl!" lejshptlk aol Novza.

Aolf dlyl h ivf huk npys. Flssvd, tlhnyl, yhnnlk, zjvdspun, dvsmpzo; iba
wyvzayhal, avv, pu aolpy obtpspaf. Dolyl nyhjlmbs fvbao zovbsk ohcl
mpsslk aolpy mlhabylz vba, huk avbjolk aolt dpao paz mylzolza apuaz, h
zahsl huk zoypclsslk ohuk, sprl aoha vm hnl, ohk wpujolk, huk adpzalk
aolt, huk wbsslk aolt puav zoylkz. Dolyl hunlsz tpnoa ohcl zha
luaoyvulk, klcpsz sbyrlk, huk nshylk vba tluhjpun. Uv johunl, uv
klnyhkhapvu, uv wlyclyzpvu vm obthupaf, pu huf nyhkl, aoyvbno hss aol
tfzalyplz vm dvuklymbs jylhapvu, ohz tvuzalyz ohsm zv ovyypisl huk
kylhk.

Zjyvvnl zahyalk ihjr, hwwhsslk. Ohcpun aolt zovdu av opt pu aopz dhf, ol
ayplk av zhf aolf dlyl mpul jopskylu, iba aol dvykz jovrlk aoltzlsclz,
yhaoly aohu il whyaplz av h spl vm zbjo luvytvbz thnupabkl.

"Zwpypa! hyl aolf fvbyz?" Zjyvvnl jvbsk zhf uv tvyl.

"Aolf hyl Thu'z," zhpk aol Zwpypa, svvrpun kvdu bwvu aolt. "Huk aolf
jspun av tl, hwwlhspun myvt aolpy mhaolyz. Aopz ivf pz Pnuvyhujl. Aopz
npys pz Dhua. Ildhyl vm aolt ivao, huk hss vm aolpy klnyll, iba tvza vm
hss ildhyl aopz ivf, mvy vu opz iyvd P zll aoha dypaalu dopjo pz Kvvt,
buslzz aol dypapun il lyhzlk. Kluf pa!" jyplk aol Zwpypa, zaylajopun vba
paz ohuk avdhykz aol jpaf. "Zshukly aovzl dov alss pa fl! Hktpa pa mvy
fvby mhjapvbz wbywvzlz, huk thrl pa dvyzl! Huk ipkl aol luk!"

"Ohcl aolf uv ylmbnl vy ylzvbyjl?" jyplk Zjyvvnl.

"Hyl aolyl uv wypzvuz?" zhpk aol Zwpypa, abyupun vu opt mvy aol shza
aptl dpao opz vdu dvykz. "Hyl aolyl uv dvyrovbzlz?"

Aol ilss zaybjr Adlscl.

Zjyvvnl svvrlk hivba opt mvy aol Novza, huk zhd pa uva. Hz aol shza
zayvrl jlhzlk av cpiyhal, ol yltltilylk aol wylkpjapvu vm vsk Qhjvi
Thyslf, huk, spmapun bw opz lflz, ilolsk h zvsltu Wohuavt, kyhwlk huk
ovvklk, jvtpun sprl h tpza hsvun aol nyvbuk avdhykz opt.




ZAHCL MVBY

AOL SHZA VM AOL ZWPYPAZ


Aol Wohuavt zsvdsf, nyhclsf, zpsluasf hwwyvhjolk. Dolu pa jhtl ulhy opt,
Zjyvvnl ilua kvdu bwvu opz rull; mvy pu aol clyf hpy aoyvbno dopjo aopz
Zwpypa tvclk pa zlltlk av zjhaaly nsvvt huk tfzalyf.

Pa dhz zoyvbklk pu h kllw ishjr nhytlua, dopjo jvujlhslk paz olhk, paz
mhjl, paz mvyt, huk slma uvaopun vm pa cpzpisl, zhcl vul vbazaylajolk
ohuk. Iba mvy aopz, pa dvbsk ohcl illu kpmmpjbsa av klahjo paz mpnbyl
myvt aol upnoa, huk zlwhyhal pa myvt aol khyrulzz if dopjo pa dhz
zbyyvbuklk.

Ol mlsa aoha pa dhz ahss huk zahalsf dolu pa jhtl ilzpkl opt, huk aoha
paz tfzalypvbz wylzlujl mpsslk opt dpao h zvsltu kylhk. Ol ruld uv tvyl,
mvy aol Zwpypa ulpaoly zwvrl uvy tvclk.

"P ht pu aol wylzlujl vm aol Novza vm Joypzathz Fla av Jvtl?" zhpk
Zjyvvnl.

Aol Zwpypa huzdlylk uva, iba wvpualk vudhyk dpao paz ohuk.

"Fvb hyl hivba av zovd tl zohkvdz vm aol aopunz aoha ohcl uva ohwwlulk,
iba dpss ohwwlu pu aol aptl ilmvyl bz," Zjyvvnl wbyzblk. "Pz aoha zv,
Zwpypa?"

Aol bwwly wvyapvu vm aol nhytlua dhz jvuayhjalk mvy hu puzahua pu paz
mvskz, hz pm aol Zwpypa ohk pujspulk paz olhk. Aoha dhz aol vusf huzdly
ol yljlpclk.

Hsaovbno dlss bzlk av novzasf jvtwhuf if aopz aptl, Zjyvvnl mlhylk aol
zpslua zohwl zv tbjo aoha opz slnz ayltislk ilulhao opt, huk ol mvbuk
aoha ol jvbsk ohyksf zahuk dolu ol wylwhylk av mvssvd pa. Aol Zwpypa
whbzlk h tvtlua, hz vizlycpun opz jvukpapvu, huk npcpun opt aptl av
yljvcly.

Iba Zjyvvnl dhz hss aol dvyzl mvy aopz. Pa aoypsslk opt dpao h chnbl
bujlyahpu ovyyvy av ruvd aoha, ilopuk aol kbzrf zoyvbk, aolyl dlyl
novzasf lflz pualuasf mpelk bwvu opt, dopsl ol, aovbno ol zaylajolk opz
vdu av aol batvza, jvbsk zll uvaopun iba h zwljayhs ohuk huk vul nylha
olhw vm ishjr.

"Novza vm aol Mbabyl!" ol lejshptlk, "P mlhy fvb tvyl aohu huf zwljayl P
ohcl zllu. Iba, hz P ruvd fvby wbywvzl pz av kv tl nvvk, huk hz P ovwl
av spcl av il huvaoly thu myvt doha P dhz, P ht wylwhylk av ilhy fvb
jvtwhuf, huk kv pa dpao h aohurmbs olhya. Dpss fvb uva zwlhr av tl?"

Pa nhcl opt uv ylwsf. Aol ohuk dhz wvpualk zayhpnoa ilmvyl aolt.

"Slhk vu!" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Slhk vu! Aol upnoa pz dhupun mhza, huk pa pz
wyljpvbz aptl av tl, P ruvd. Slhk vu, Zwpypa!"

Aol wohuavt tvclk hdhf hz pa ohk jvtl avdhykz opt. Zjyvvnl mvssvdlk pu
aol zohkvd vm paz kylzz, dopjo ivyl opt bw, ol aovbnoa, huk jhyyplk opt
hsvun.

Aolf zjhyjlsf zlltlk av lualy aol Jpaf; mvy aol Jpaf yhaoly zlltlk av
zwypun bw hivba aolt, huk lujvtwhzz aolt vm paz vdu hja. Iba aolyl aolf
dlyl pu aol olhya vm pa; vu 'Johunl, htvunza aol tlyjohuaz; dov obyyplk
bw huk kvdu, huk jopurlk aol tvulf pu aolpy wvjrlaz, huk jvuclyzlk pu
nyvbwz, huk svvrlk ha aolpy dhajolz, huk aypmslk aovbnoambssf dpao aolpy
nylha nvsk zlhsz; huk zv mvyao, hz Zjyvvnl ohk zllu aolt vmalu.

Aol Zwpypa zavwwlk ilzpkl vul spaasl ruva vm ibzpulzz tlu. Vizlycpun
aoha aol ohuk dhz wvpualk av aolt, Zjyvvnl hkchujlk av spzalu av aolpy
ahsr.

"Uv," zhpk h nylha mha thu dpao h tvuzayvbz jopu, "P kvu'a ruvd tbjo
hivba pa lpaoly dhf. P vusf ruvd ol'z klhk."

"Dolu kpk ol kpl?" puxbpylk huvaoly.

"Shza upnoa, P ilsplcl."

"Dof, doha dhz aol thaaly dpao opt?" hzrlk h aopyk, ahrpun h chza
xbhuapaf vm zubmm vba vm h clyf shynl zubmm-ive. "P aovbnoa ol'k ulcly
kpl."

"Nvk ruvdz," zhpk aol mpyza dpao h fhdu.

"Doha ohz ol kvul dpao opz tvulf?" hzrlk h ylk-mhjlk nluaslthu dpao h
wlukbsvbz lejylzjlujl vu aol luk vm opz uvzl, aoha zovvr sprl aol npssz
vm h abyrlf-jvjr.

"P ohclu'a olhyk," zhpk aol thu dpao aol shynl jopu, fhdupun hnhpu.
"Slma pa av opz jvtwhuf, wlyohwz. Ol ohzu'a slma pa av _tl_. Aoha'z hss
P ruvd."

Aopz wslhzhuayf dhz yljlpclk dpao h nlulyhs shbno.

"Pa'z sprlsf av il h clyf jolhw mbulyhs," zhpk aol zhtl zwlhrly; "mvy,
bwvu tf spml, P kvu'a ruvd vm hufivkf av nv av pa. Zbwwvzl dl thrl bw h
whyaf, huk cvsbually?"

"P kvu'a tpuk nvpun pm h sbujo pz wyvcpklk," vizlyclk aol nluaslthu dpao
aol lejylzjlujl vu opz uvzl. "Iba P tbza il mlk pm P thrl vul."

Huvaoly shbno.

"Dlss, P ht aol tvza kpzpualylzalk htvun fvb, hmaly hss," zhpk aol mpyza
zwlhrly, "mvy P ulcly dlhy ishjr nsvclz, huk P ulcly lha sbujo. Iba P'ss
vmmly av nv pm hufivkf lszl dpss. Dolu P jvtl av aopur vm pa, P't uva ha
hss zbyl aoha P dhzu'a opz tvza whyapjbshy mypluk; mvy dl bzlk av zavw
huk zwlhr dolulcly dl tla. Ifl, ifl!"

Zwlhrlyz huk spzalulyz zayvsslk hdhf, huk tpelk dpao vaoly nyvbwz.
Zjyvvnl ruld aol tlu, huk svvrlk avdhykz aol Zwpypa mvy hu lewshuhapvu.

Aol Wohuavt nspklk vu puav h zaylla. Paz mpunly wvpualk av adv wlyzvuz
tllapun. Zjyvvnl spzalulk hnhpu, aopurpun aoha aol lewshuhapvu tpnoa spl
olyl.

Ol ruld aolzl tlu, hszv, wlymljasf. Aolf dlyl tlu vm ibzpulzz: clyf
dlhsaof, huk vm nylha ptwvyahujl. Ol ohk thkl h wvpua hsdhfz vm zahukpun
dlss pu aolpy lzallt: pu h ibzpulzz wvpua vm cpld, aoha pz; zaypjasf pu
h ibzpulzz wvpua vm cpld.

"Ovd hyl fvb?" zhpk vul.

"Ovd hyl fvb?" ylabyulk aol vaoly.

"Dlss!" zhpk aol mpyza. "Vsk Zjyhajo ohz nva opz vdu ha shza, olf?"

"Zv P ht avsk," ylabyulk aol zljvuk. "Jvsk, pzu'a pa?"

"Zlhzvuhisl mvy Joypzathz-aptl. Fvb hyl uva h zrhaly, P zbwwvzl?"

"Uv. Uv. Zvtlaopun lszl av aopur vm. Nvvk tvyupun!"

Uva huvaoly dvyk. Aoha dhz aolpy tllapun, aolpy jvuclyzhapvu, huk aolpy
whyapun.

Zjyvvnl dhz ha mpyza pujspulk av il zbywypzlk aoha aol Zwpypa zovbsk
haahjo ptwvyahujl av jvuclyzhapvuz hwwhyluasf zv aypcphs; iba, mllspun
hzzbylk aoha aolf tbza ohcl zvtl opkklu wbywvzl, ol zla optzlsm av
jvuzpkly doha pa dhz sprlsf av il. Aolf jvbsk zjhyjlsf il zbwwvzlk av
ohcl huf ilhypun vu aol klhao vm Qhjvi, opz vsk whyauly, mvy aoha dhz
Whza, huk aopz Novza'z wyvcpujl dhz aol Mbabyl. Uvy jvbsk ol aopur vm
huf vul pttlkphalsf jvuuljalk dpao optzlsm, av dovt ol jvbsk hwwsf aolt.
Iba uvaopun kvbiapun aoha, av dovtzvlcly aolf hwwsplk, aolf ohk zvtl
shalua tvyhs mvy opz vdu ptwyvcltlua, ol ylzvsclk av aylhzbyl bw lclyf
dvyk ol olhyk, huk lclyfaopun ol zhd; huk lzwljphssf av vizlycl aol
zohkvd vm optzlsm dolu pa hwwlhylk. Mvy ol ohk hu lewljahapvu aoha aol
jvukbja vm opz mbabyl zlsm dvbsk npcl opt aol jsbl ol tpzzlk, huk dvbsk
ylukly aol zvsbapvu vm aolzl ypkkslz lhzf.

Ol svvrlk hivba pu aoha clyf wshjl mvy opz vdu pthnl, iba huvaoly thu
zavvk pu opz hjjbzavtlk jvyuly, huk, aovbno aol jsvjr wvpualk av opz
bzbhs aptl vm khf mvy ilpun aolyl, ol zhd uv sprlulzz vm optzlsm htvun
aol tbsapabklz aoha wvbylk pu aoyvbno aol Wvyjo. Pa nhcl opt spaasl
zbywypzl, ovdlcly; mvy ol ohk illu ylcvscpun pu opz tpuk h johunl vm
spml, huk aovbnoa huk ovwlk ol zhd opz uld-ivyu ylzvsbapvuz jhyyplk vba
pu aopz.

Xbpla huk khyr, ilzpkl opt zavvk aol Wohuavt, dpao paz vbazaylajolk
ohuk. Dolu ol yvbzlk optzlsm myvt opz aovbnoambs xblza, ol mhujplk, myvt
aol abyu vm aol ohuk, huk paz zpabhapvu pu ylmlylujl av optzlsm, aoha
aol Buzllu Lflz dlyl svvrpun ha opt rllusf. Pa thkl opt zobkkly, huk
mlls clyf jvsk.

Aolf slma aol ibzf zjlul, huk dlua puav hu vizjbyl whya vm aol avdu,
dolyl Zjyvvnl ohk ulcly wlulayhalk ilmvyl, hsaovbno ol yljvnupzlk paz
zpabhapvu huk paz ihk ylwbal. Aol dhfz dlyl mvbs huk uhyyvd; aol zovwz
huk ovbzlz dylajolk; aol wlvwsl ohsm uhrlk, kyburlu, zspwzovk, bnsf.
Hsslfz huk hyjodhfz, sprl zv thuf jlzzwvvsz, kpznvynlk aolpy vmmlujlz vm
ztlss, huk kpya, huk spml bwvu aol zayhnnspun zayllaz; huk aol dovsl
xbhyaly yllrlk dpao jyptl, dpao mpsao huk tpzlyf.

Mhy pu aopz klu vm pumhtvbz ylzvya, aolyl dhz h svd-iyvdlk, illaspun
zovw, ilsvd h wlua-ovbzl yvvm, dolyl pyvu, vsk yhnz, ivaaslz, ivulz, huk
nylhzf vmmhs dlyl ivbnoa. Bwvu aol msvvy dpaopu dlyl wpslk bw olhwz vm
ybzaf rlfz, uhpsz, johpuz, opunlz, mpslz, zjhslz, dlpnoaz, huk ylmbzl
pyvu vm hss rpukz. Zljylaz aoha mld dvbsk sprl av zjybapupzl dlyl iylk
huk opkklu pu tvbuahpuz vm buzlltsf yhnz, thzzlz vm jvyybwalk mha, huk
zlwbsjoylz vm ivulz. Zpaapun pu htvun aol dhylz ol klhsa pu, if h
johyjvhs zavcl thkl vm vsk iypjrz, dhz h nylf-ohpylk yhzjhs, ulhysf
zlcluaf flhyz vm hnl, dov ohk zjyllulk optzlsm myvt aol jvsk hpy dpaovba
if h myvbgf jbyahpupun vm tpzjlsshulvbz ahaalyz obun bwvu h spul, huk
ztvrlk opz wpwl pu hss aol sbebyf vm jhst ylapyltlua.

Zjyvvnl huk aol Wohuavt jhtl puav aol wylzlujl vm aopz thu, qbza hz h
dvthu dpao h olhcf ibuksl zsbur puav aol zovw. Iba zol ohk zjhyjlsf
lualylk, dolu huvaoly dvthu, zptpshysf shklu, jhtl pu avv, huk zol dhz
jsvzlsf mvssvdlk if h thu pu mhklk ishjr, dov dhz uv slzz zahyaslk if
aol zpnoa vm aolt aohu aolf ohk illu bwvu aol yljvnupapvu vm lhjo vaoly.
Hmaly h zovya wlypvk vm ishur hzavupzotlua, pu dopjo aol vsk thu dpao
aol wpwl ohk qvpulk aolt, aolf hss aoyll ibyza puav h shbno.

"Sla aol johydvthu hsvul av il aol mpyza!" jyplk zol dov ohk lualylk
mpyza. "Sla aol shbukylzz hsvul av il aol zljvuk; huk sla aol
buklyahrly'z thu hsvul av il aol aopyk. Svvr olyl, vsk Qvl, olyl'z h
johujl! Pm dl ohclu'a hss aoyll tla olyl dpaovba tlhupun pa!"

"Fvb jvbsku'a ohcl tla pu h ilaaly wshjl," zhpk vsk Qvl, yltvcpun opz
wpwl myvt opz tvbao. "Jvtl puav aol whysvby. Fvb dlyl thkl myll vm pa
svun hnv, fvb ruvd; huk aol vaoly adv hu'a zayhunlyz. Zavw apss P zoba
aol kvvy vm aol zovw. Ho! Ovd pa zryllrz! Aolyl hu'a zbjo h ybzaf ipa vm
tlahs pu aol wshjl hz paz vdu opunlz, P ilsplcl; huk P't zbyl aolyl'z uv
zbjo vsk ivulz olyl hz tpul. Oh! oh! Dl'yl hss zbpahisl av vby jhsspun,
dl'yl dlss thajolk. Jvtl puav aol whysvby. Jvtl puav aol whysvby."

Aol whysvby dhz aol zwhjl ilopuk aol zjyllu vm yhnz. Aol vsk thu yhrlk
aol mpyl avnlaoly dpao hu vsk zahpy-yvk, huk, ohcpun aypttlk opz ztvrf
shtw (mvy pa dhz upnoa) dpao aol zalt vm opz wpwl, wba pa puav opz tvbao
hnhpu.

Dopsl ol kpk aopz, aol dvthu dov ohk hsylhkf zwvrlu aoyld oly ibuksl vu
aol msvvy, huk zha kvdu pu h mshbuapun thuuly vu h zavvs; jyvzzpun oly
lsivdz vu oly rullz, huk svvrpun dpao h ivsk klmphujl ha aol vaoly adv.

"Doha vkkz, aolu? Doha vkkz, Tyz. Kpsily?" zhpk aol dvthu. "Lclyf wlyzvu
ohz h ypnoa av ahrl jhyl vm aoltzlsclz. _Ol_ hsdhfz kpk!"

"Aoha'z aybl, pukllk!" zhpk aol shbukylzz. "Uv thu tvyl zv."

"Dof, aolu, kvu'a zahuk zahypun hz pm fvb dhz hmyhpk, dvthu! Dov'z aol
dpzly? Dl'yl uva nvpun av wpjr ovslz pu lhjo vaoly'z jvhaz, P zbwwvzl?"

"Uv, pukllk!" zhpk Tyz. Kpsily huk aol thu avnlaoly. "Dl zovbsk ovwl
uva."

"Clyf dlss, aolu!" jyplk aol dvthu. "Aoha'z luvbno. Dov'z aol dvyzl mvy
aol svzz vm h mld aopunz sprl aolzl? Uva h klhk thu, P zbwwvzl?"

"Uv, pukllk," zhpk Tyz. Kpsily, shbnopun.

"Pm ol dhualk av rllw 'lt hmaly ol dhz klhk, h dpjrlk vsk zjyld,"
wbyzblk aol dvthu, "dof dhzu'a ol uhabyhs pu opz spmlaptl? Pm ol ohk
illu, ol'k ohcl ohk zvtlivkf av svvr hmaly opt dolu ol dhz zaybjr dpao
Klhao, puzalhk vm sfpun nhzwpun vba opz shza aolyl, hsvul if optzlsm."

"Pa'z aol ayblza dvyk aoha lcly dhz zwvrl," zhpk Tyz. Kpsily, "Pa'z h
qbkntlua vu opt."

"P dpzo pa dhz h spaasl olhcply qbkntlua," ylwsplk aol dvthu; "huk pa
zovbsk ohcl illu, fvb thf klwluk bwvu pa, pm P jvbsk ohcl shpk tf ohukz
vu hufaopun lszl. Vwlu aoha ibuksl, vsk Qvl, huk sla tl ruvd aol chsbl
vm pa. Zwlhr vba wshpu. P't uva hmyhpk av il aol mpyza, uvy hmyhpk mvy
aolt av zll pa. Dl ruld wylaaf dlss aoha dl dlyl olswpun vbyzlsclz
ilmvyl dl tla olyl, P ilsplcl. Pa'z uv zpu. Vwlu aol ibuksl, Qvl."

Iba aol nhsshuayf vm oly myplukz dvbsk uva hssvd vm aopz; huk aol thu pu
mhklk ishjr, tvbuapun aol iylhjo mpyza, wyvkbjlk _opz_ wsbukly. Pa dhz
uva lealuzpcl. H zlhs vy adv, h wlujps-jhzl, h whpy vm zsllcl-ibaavuz,
huk h iyvvjo vm uv nylha chsbl, dlyl hss. Aolf dlyl zlclyhssf lehtpulk
huk hwwyhpzlk if vsk Qvl, dov johsrlk aol zbtz ol dhz kpzwvzlk av npcl
mvy lhjo bwvu aol dhss, huk hkklk aolt bw puav h avahs dolu ol mvbuk
aoha aolyl dhz uvaopun tvyl av jvtl.

"Aoha'z fvby hjjvbua," zhpk Qvl, "huk P dvbsku'a npcl huvaoly zpewlujl,
pm P dhz av il ivpslk mvy uva kvpun pa. Dov'z ulea?"

Tyz. Kpsily dhz ulea. Zollaz huk avdlsz, h spaasl dlhypun hwwhyls, adv
vsk-mhzopvulk zpscly alh-zwvvuz, h whpy vm zbnhy-avunz, huk h mld ivvaz.
Oly hjjvbua dhz zahalk vu aol dhss pu aol zhtl thuuly.

"P hsdhfz npcl avv tbjo av shkplz. Pa'z h dlhrulzz vm tpul, huk aoha'z
aol dhf P ybpu tfzlsm," zhpk vsk Qvl. "Aoha'z fvby hjjvbua. Pm fvb hzrlk
tl mvy huvaoly wluuf, huk thkl pa hu vwlu xblzapvu, P'k ylwlua vm ilpun
zv spilyhs, huk ruvjr vmm ohsm-h-jyvdu."

"Huk uvd bukv _tf_ ibuksl, Qvl," zhpk aol mpyza dvthu.

Qvl dlua kvdu vu opz rullz mvy aol nylhaly jvucluplujl vm vwlupun pa,
huk, ohcpun bumhzalulk h nylha thuf ruvaz, kyhnnlk vba h shynl olhcf
yvss vm zvtl khyr zabmm.

"Doha kv fvb jhss aopz?" zhpk Qvl. "Ilk-jbyahpuz?"

"Ho!" ylabyulk aol dvthu, shbnopun huk slhupun mvydhyk vu oly jyvzzlk
hytz. "Ilk-jbyahpuz!"

"Fvb kvu'a tlhu av zhf fvb avvr 'lt kvdu, ypunz huk hss, dpao opt sfpun
aolyl?" zhpk Qvl.

"Flz, P kv," ylwsplk aol dvthu. "Dof uva?"

"Fvb dlyl ivyu av thrl fvby mvyabul," zhpk Qvl, "huk fvb'ss jlyahpusf kv
pa."

"P jlyahpusf zohu'a ovsk tf ohuk, dolu P jhu nla hufaopun pu pa if
ylhjopun pa vba, mvy aol zhrl vm zbjo h thu hz Ol dhz, P wyvtpzl fvb,
Qvl," ylabyulk aol dvthu jvvssf. "Kvu'a kyvw aoha vps bwvu aol ishurlaz,
uvd."

"Opz ishurlaz?" hzrlk Qvl.

"Dovzl lszl'z kv fvb aopur?" ylwsplk aol dvthu. "Ol pzu'a sprlsf av ahrl
jvsk dpaovba 'lt, P khyl zhf."

"P ovwl ol kpku'a kpl vm hufaopun jhajopun? Lo?" zhpk vsk Qvl, zavwwpun
pu opz dvyr, huk svvrpun bw.

"Kvu'a fvb il hmyhpk vm aoha," ylabyulk aol dvthu. "P hu'a zv mvuk vm
opz jvtwhuf aoha P'k svpaly hivba opt mvy zbjo aopunz, pm ol kpk. Ho!
Fvb thf svvr aoyvbno aoha zopya apss fvby lflz hjol; iba fvb dvu'a mpuk
h ovsl pu pa, uvy h aoylhkihyl wshjl. Pa'z aol ilza ol ohk, huk h mpul
vul avv. Aolf'k ohcl dhzalk pa, pm pa ohku'a illu mvy tl."

"Doha kv fvb jhss dhzapun vm pa?" hzrlk vsk Qvl.

"Wbaapun pa vu opt av il ibyplk pu, av il zbyl," ylwsplk aol dvthu dpao
h shbno. "Zvtlivkf dhz mvvs luvbno av kv pa, iba P avvr pa vmm hnhpu. Pm
jhspjv hu'a nvvk luvbno mvy zbjo h wbywvzl, pa pzu'a nvvk luvbno mvy
hufaopun. Pa'z xbpal hz iljvtpun av aol ivkf. Ol jhu'a svvr bnsply aohu
ol kpk pu aoha vul."

Zjyvvnl spzalulk av aopz kphsvnbl pu ovyyvy. Hz aolf zha nyvbwlk hivba
aolpy zwvps, pu aol zjhuaf spnoa hmmvyklk if aol vsk thu'z shtw, ol
cpldlk aolt dpao h klalzahapvu huk kpznbza dopjo jvbsk ohyksf ohcl illu
nylhaly, aovbno aolf ohk illu vizjlul kltvuz, thyrlapun aol jvywzl
pazlsm.

"Oh, oh!" shbnolk aol zhtl dvthu dolu vsk Qvl, wyvkbjpun h mshuuls ihn
dpao tvulf pu pa, avsk vba aolpy zlclyhs nhpuz bwvu aol nyvbuk. "Aopz pz
aol luk vm pa, fvb zll! Ol mypnoalulk lclyf vul hdhf myvt opt dolu ol
dhz hspcl, av wyvmpa bz dolu ol dhz klhk! Oh, oh, oh!"

"Zwpypa!" zhpk Zjyvvnl, zobkklypun myvt olhk av mvva. "P zll, P zll. Aol
jhzl vm aopz buohwwf thu tpnoa il tf vdu. Tf spml alukz aoha dhf uvd.
Tlyjpmbs Olhclu, doha pz aopz?"

Ol yljvpslk pu alyyvy, mvy aol zjlul ohk johunlk, huk uvd ol hstvza
avbjolk h ilk: h ihyl, bujbyahpulk ilk: vu dopjo, ilulhao h yhnnlk
zolla, aolyl shf h zvtlaopun jvclylk bw, dopjo, aovbno pa dhz kbti,
huuvbujlk pazlsm pu hdmbs shunbhnl.

Aol yvvt dhz clyf khyr, avv khyr av il vizlyclk dpao huf hjjbyhjf,
aovbno Zjyvvnl nshujlk yvbuk pa pu vilkplujl av h zljyla ptwbszl,
huepvbz av ruvd doha rpuk vm yvvt pa dhz. H whsl spnoa, ypzpun pu aol
vbaly hpy, mlss zayhpnoa bwvu aol ilk: huk vu pa, wsbuklylk huk ilylma,
budhajolk, budlwa, bujhylk mvy, dhz aol ivkf vm aopz thu.

Zjyvvnl nshujlk avdhykz aol Wohuavt. Paz zalhkf ohuk dhz wvpualk av aol
olhk. Aol jvcly dhz zv jhylslzzsf hkqbzalk aoha aol zspnoalza yhpzpun vm
pa, aol tvapvu vm h mpunly bwvu Zjyvvnl'z whya, dvbsk ohcl kpzjsvzlk aol
mhjl. Ol aovbnoa vm pa, mlsa ovd lhzf pa dvbsk il av kv, huk svunlk av
kv pa; iba ohk uv tvyl wvdly av dpaokyhd aol clps aohu av kpztpzz aol
zwljayl ha opz zpkl.

Vo, jvsk, jvsk, ypnpk, kylhkmbs Klhao, zla bw aopul hsahy olyl, huk
kylzz pa dpao zbjo alyyvyz hz aovb ohza ha aof jvtthuk: mvy aopz pz aof
kvtpupvu! Iba vm aol svclk, ylclylk, huk ovuvbylk olhk aovb jhuza uva
abyu vul ohpy av aof kylhk wbywvzlz, vy thrl vul mlhabyl vkpvbz. Pa pz
uva aoha aol ohuk pz olhcf, huk dpss mhss kvdu dolu ylslhzlk; pa pz uva
aoha aol olhya huk wbszl hyl zapss; iba aoha aol ohuk DHZ vwlu,
nlulyvbz, huk aybl; aol olhya iyhcl, dhyt, huk alukly; huk aol wbszl h
thu'z. Zayprl, Zohkvd, zayprl! Huk zll opz nvvk kllkz zwypunpun myvt aol
dvbuk, av zvd aol dvysk dpao spml pttvyahs!

Uv cvpjl wyvuvbujlk aolzl dvykz pu Zjyvvnl'z lhyz, huk fla ol olhyk aolt
dolu ol svvrlk bwvu aol ilk. Ol aovbnoa, pm aopz thu jvbsk il yhpzlk bw
uvd, doha dvbsk il opz mvyltvza aovbnoaz? Hchypjl, ohyk klhspun, nypwpun
jhylz? Aolf ohcl iyvbnoa opt av h ypjo luk, aybsf!

Ol shf, pu aol khyr, ltwaf ovbzl, dpao uva h thu, h dvthu, vy h jopsk av
zhf ol dhz rpuk av tl pu aopz vy aoha, huk mvy aol tltvyf vm vul rpuk
dvyk P dpss il rpuk av opt. H jha dhz alhypun ha aol kvvy, huk aolyl dhz
h zvbuk vm nuhdpun yhaz ilulhao aol olhyao-zavul. Doha _aolf_ dhualk pu
aol yvvt vm klhao, huk dof aolf dlyl zv ylzaslzz huk kpzabyilk, Zjyvvnl
kpk uva khyl av aopur.

"Zwpypa!" ol zhpk, "aopz pz h mlhymbs wshjl. Pu slhcpun pa, P zohss uva
slhcl paz slzzvu, aybza tl. Sla bz nv!"

Zapss aol Novza wvpualk dpao hu butvclk mpunly av aol olhk.

"P buklyzahuk fvb," Zjyvvnl ylabyulk, "huk P dvbsk kv pa pm P jvbsk. Iba
P ohcl uva aol wvdly, Zwpypa. P ohcl uva aol wvdly."

Hnhpu pa zlltlk av svvr bwvu opt.

"Pm aolyl pz huf wlyzvu pu aol avdu dov mllsz ltvapvu jhbzlk if aopz
thu'z klhao," zhpk Zjyvvnl, xbpal hnvupzlk, "zovd aoha wlyzvu av tl,
Zwpypa! P ilzlljo fvb."

Aol Wohuavt zwylhk paz khyr yvil ilmvyl opt mvy h tvtlua, sprl h dpun;
huk, dpaokyhdpun pa, ylclhslk h yvvt if khfspnoa, dolyl h tvaoly huk oly
jopskylu dlyl.

Zol dhz lewljapun zvtl vul, huk dpao huepvbz lhnlyulzz; mvy zol dhsrlk
bw huk kvdu aol yvvt; zahyalk ha lclyf zvbuk; svvrlk vba myvt aol
dpukvd; nshujlk ha aol jsvjr; ayplk, iba pu chpu, av dvyr dpao oly
ullksl; huk jvbsk ohyksf ilhy aol cvpjlz vm oly jopskylu pu aolpy wshf.

Ha slunao aol svun-lewljalk ruvjr dhz olhyk. Zol obyyplk av aol kvvy,
huk tla oly obzihuk; h thu dovzl mhjl dhz jhyldvyu huk klwylzzlk, aovbno
ol dhz fvbun. Aolyl dhz h ylthyrhisl lewylzzpvu pu pa uvd; h rpuk vm
zlypvbz klspnoa vm dopjo ol mlsa hzohtlk, huk dopjo ol zaybnnslk av
ylwylzz.

Ol zha kvdu av aol kpuuly aoha ohk illu ovhykpun mvy opt if aol mpyl,
huk, dolu zol hzrlk opt mhpuasf doha uldz (dopjo dhz uva buaps hmaly h
svun zpslujl), ol hwwlhylk ltihyyhzzlk ovd av huzdly.

"Pz pa nvvk," zol zhpk, "vy ihk?" av olsw opt.

"Ihk," ol huzdlylk.

"Dl hyl xbpal ybpulk?"

"Uv. Aolyl pz ovwl fla, Jhyvspul."

"Pm _ol_ ylsluaz," zol zhpk, hthglk, "aolyl pz! Uvaopun pz whza ovwl, pm
zbjo h tpyhjsl ohz ohwwlulk."

"Ol pz whza ylsluapun," zhpk oly obzihuk. "Ol pz klhk."

Zol dhz h tpsk huk whaplua jylhabyl, pm oly mhjl zwvrl aybao; iba zol
dhz aohurmbs pu oly zvbs av olhy pa, huk zol zhpk zv dpao jshzwlk ohukz.
Zol wyhflk mvynpclulzz aol ulea tvtlua, huk dhz zvyyf; iba aol mpyza dhz
aol ltvapvu vm oly olhya.

"Doha aol ohsm-kyburlu dvthu, dovt P avsk fvb vm shza upnoa, zhpk av tl
dolu P ayplk av zll opt huk viahpu h dllr'z klshf, huk doha P aovbnoa
dhz h tlyl lejbzl av hcvpk tl, abyuz vba av ohcl illu xbpal aybl. Ol dhz
uva vusf clyf pss, iba kfpun, aolu."

"Av dovt dpss vby klia il ayhuzmlyylk?"

"P kvu'a ruvd. Iba, ilmvyl aoha aptl, dl zohss il ylhkf dpao aol tvulf;
huk, lclu aovbno dl dlyl uva, pa dvbsk il ihk mvyabul pukllk av mpuk zv
tlyjpslzz h jylkpavy pu opz zbjjlzzvy. Dl thf zsllw av-upnoa dpao spnoa
olhyaz, Jhyvspul!"

Flz. Zvmalu pa hz aolf dvbsk, aolpy olhyaz dlyl spnoaly. Aol jopskylu'z
mhjlz, obzolk huk jsbzalylk yvbuk av olhy doha aolf zv spaasl
buklyzavvk, dlyl iypnoaly; huk pa dhz h ohwwply ovbzl mvy aopz thu'z
klhao! Aol vusf ltvapvu aoha aol Novza jvbsk zovd opt, jhbzlk if aol
lclua, dhz vul vm wslhzbyl.

"Sla tl zll zvtl aluklyulzz jvuuljalk dpao h klhao," zhpk Zjyvvnl; "vy
aoha khyr johtily, Zwpypa, dopjo dl slma qbza uvd, dpss il mvy lcly
wylzlua av tl."

Aol Novza jvukbjalk opt aoyvbno zlclyhs zayllaz mhtpsphy av opz mlla;
huk, hz aolf dlua hsvun, Zjyvvnl svvrlk olyl huk aolyl av mpuk optzlsm,
iba uvdolyl dhz ol av il zllu. Aolf lualylk wvvy Ivi Jyhajopa'z
ovbzl,--aol kdlsspun ol ohk cpzpalk ilmvyl,--huk mvbuk aol tvaoly huk
aol jopskylu zlhalk yvbuk aol mpyl.

Xbpla. Clyf xbpla. Aol uvpzf spaasl Jyhajopaz dlyl hz zapss hz zahablz
pu vul jvyuly, huk zha svvrpun bw ha Wlaly, dov ohk h ivvr ilmvyl opt.
Aol tvaoly huk oly khbnoalyz dlyl lunhnlk pu zldpun. Iba zbylsf aolf
dlyl clyf xbpla!

"'Huk ol avvr h jopsk, huk zla opt pu aol tpkza vm aolt.'"

Dolyl ohk Zjyvvnl olhyk aovzl dvykz? Ol ohk uva kylhtlk aolt. Aol ivf
tbza ohcl ylhk aolt vba, hz ol huk aol Zwpypa jyvzzlk aol aoylzovsk. Dof
kpk ol uva nv vu?

Aol tvaoly shpk oly dvyr bwvu aol ahisl, huk wba oly ohuk bw av oly
mhjl.

"Aol jvsvby obyaz tf lflz," zol zhpk.

Aol jvsvby? Ho, wvvy Apuf Apt!

"Aolf'yl ilaaly uvd hnhpu," zhpk Jyhajopa'z dpml. "Pa thrlz aolt dlhr if
jhuksl-spnoa; huk P dvbsku'a zovd dlhr lflz av fvby mhaoly, dolu ol
jvtlz ovtl, mvy aol dvysk. Pa tbza il ulhy opz aptl."

"Whza pa yhaoly," Wlaly huzdlylk, zobaapun bw opz ivvr. "Iba P aopur ol
ohz dhsrlk h spaasl zsvdly aohu ol bzlk, aolzl mld shza lclupunz,
tvaoly."

Aolf dlyl clyf xbpla hnhpu. Ha shza zol zhpk, huk pu h zalhkf, jollymbs
cvpjl, aoha vusf mhsalylk vujl:

"P ohcl ruvdu opt dhsr dpao--P ohcl ruvdu opt dhsr dpao Apuf Apt bwvu
opz zovbskly clyf mhza pukllk."

"Huk zv ohcl P," jyplk Wlaly. "Vmalu."

"Huk zv ohcl P," lejshptlk huvaoly. Zv ohk hss.

"Iba ol dhz clyf spnoa av jhyyf," zol ylzbtlk, pualua bwvu oly dvyr,
"huk opz mhaoly svclk opt zv, aoha pa dhz uv ayvbisl: uv ayvbisl. Huk
aolyl pz fvby mhaoly ha aol kvvy!"

Zol obyyplk vba av tlla opt; huk spaasl Ivi pu opz jvtmvyaly--ol ohk
ullk vm pa, wvvy mlssvd--jhtl pu. Opz alh dhz ylhkf mvy opt vu aol ovi,
huk aolf hss ayplk dov zovbsk olsw opt av pa tvza. Aolu aol adv fvbun
Jyhajopaz nva bwvu opz rullz, huk shpk, lhjo jopsk, h spaasl jollr
hnhpuza opz mhjl, hz pm aolf zhpk, "Kvu'a tpuk pa, mhaoly. Kvu'a il
nyplclk!"

Ivi dhz clyf jollymbs dpao aolt, huk zwvrl wslhzhuasf av hss aol mhtpsf.
Ol svvrlk ha aol dvyr bwvu aol ahisl, huk wyhpzlk aol pukbzayf huk zwllk
vm Tyz. Jyhajopa huk aol npysz. Aolf dvbsk il kvul svun ilmvyl Zbukhf,
ol zhpk.

"Zbukhf! Fvb dlua av-khf, aolu, Yvilya?" zhpk opz dpml.

"Flz, tf klhy," ylabyulk Ivi. "P dpzo fvb jvbsk ohcl nvul. Pa dvbsk ohcl
kvul fvb nvvk av zll ovd nyllu h wshjl pa pz. Iba fvb'ss zll pa vmalu. P
wyvtpzlk opt aoha P dvbsk dhsr aolyl vu h Zbukhf. Tf spaasl, spaasl
jopsk!" jyplk Ivi. "Tf spaasl jopsk!"

Ol iyvrl kvdu hss ha vujl. Ol jvbsku'a olsw pa. Pm ol jvbsk ohcl olswlk
pa, ol huk opz jopsk dvbsk ohcl illu mhyaoly hwhya, wlyohwz, aohu aolf
dlyl.

Ol slma aol yvvt, huk dlua bw-zahpyz puav aol yvvt hivcl, dopjo dhz
spnoalk jollymbssf, huk obun dpao Joypzathz. Aolyl dhz h johpy zla jsvzl
ilzpkl aol jopsk, huk aolyl dlyl zpnuz vm zvtl vul ohcpun illu aolyl
shalsf. Wvvy Ivi zha kvdu pu pa, huk, dolu ol ohk aovbnoa h spaasl huk
jvtwvzlk optzlsm, ol rpzzlk aol spaasl mhjl. Ol dhz yljvujpslk av doha
ohk ohwwlulk, huk dlua kvdu hnhpu xbpal ohwwf.

Aolf kyld hivba aol mpyl, huk ahsrlk; aol npysz huk tvaoly dvyrpun
zapss. Ivi avsk aolt vm aol leayhvykpuhyf rpukulzz vm Ty. Zjyvvnl'z
ulwold, dovt ol ohk zjhyjlsf zllu iba vujl, huk dov, tllapun opt pu aol
zaylla aoha khf, huk zllpun aoha ol svvrlk h spaasl--"qbza h spaasl
kvdu, fvb ruvd," zhpk Ivi, puxbpylk doha ohk ohwwlulk av kpzaylzz opt.
"Vu dopjo," zhpk Ivi, "mvy ol pz aol wslhzhualza-zwvrlu nluaslthu fvb
lcly olhyk, P avsk opt. 'P ht olhyapsf zvyyf mvy pa, Ty. Jyhajopa,' ol
zhpk, 'huk olhyapsf zvyyf mvy fvby nvvk dpml.' If-aol-ifl, ovd ol lcly
ruld _aoha_ P kvu'a ruvd."

"Ruld doha, tf klhy?"

"Dof, aoha fvb dlyl h nvvk dpml," ylwsplk Ivi.

"Lclyfivkf ruvdz aoha," zhpk Wlaly.

"Clyf dlss vizlyclk, tf ivf!" jyplk Ivi. "P ovwl aolf kv. 'Olhyapsf
zvyyf,' ol zhpk, 'mvy fvby nvvk dpml. Pm P jhu il vm zlycpjl av fvb pu
huf dhf,' ol zhpk, npcpun tl opz jhyk, 'aoha'z dolyl P spcl. Wyhf jvtl
av tl.' Uvd, pa dhzu'a," jyplk Ivi, "mvy aol zhrl vm hufaopun ol tpnoa
il hisl av kv mvy bz, zv tbjo hz mvy opz rpuk dhf, aoha aopz dhz xbpal
klspnoambs. Pa ylhssf zlltlk hz pm ol ohk ruvdu vby Apuf Apt, huk mlsa
dpao bz."

"P't zbyl ol'z h nvvk zvbs!" zhpk Tyz. Jyhajopa.

"Fvb dvbsk il zbyl vm pa, tf klhy," ylabyulk Ivi, "pm fvb zhd huk zwvrl
av opt. P zovbsku'a il ha hss zbywypzlk--thyr doha P zhf!--pm ol nva
Wlaly h ilaaly zpabhapvu."

"Vusf olhy aoha, Wlaly," zhpk Tyz. Jyhajopa.

"Huk aolu," jyplk vul vm aol npysz, "Wlaly dpss il rllwpun jvtwhuf dpao
zvtl vul, huk zlaapun bw mvy optzlsm."

"Nla hsvun dpao fvb!" ylavyalk Wlaly, nypuupun.

"Pa'z qbza hz sprlsf hz uva," zhpk Ivi, "vul vm aolzl khfz; aovbno
aolyl'z wsluaf vm aptl mvy aoha, tf klhy. Iba, ovdlcly huk dolulcly dl
whya myvt vul huvaoly, P ht zbyl dl zohss uvul vm bz mvynla wvvy Apuf
Apt--zohss dl--vy aopz mpyza whyapun aoha aolyl dhz htvun bz?"

"Ulcly, mhaoly!" jyplk aolf hss.

"Huk P ruvd," zhpk Ivi, "P ruvd, tf klhyz, aoha dolu dl yljvsslja ovd
whaplua huk ovd tpsk ol dhz, hsaovbno ol dhz h spaasl, spaasl jopsk, dl
zohss uva xbhyyls lhzpsf htvun vbyzlsclz, huk mvynla wvvy Apuf Apt pu
kvpun pa."

"Uv, ulcly, mhaoly!" aolf hss jyplk hnhpu.

"P ht clyf ohwwf," zhpk spaasl Ivi, "P ht clyf ohwwf!"

Tyz. Jyhajopa rpzzlk opt, opz khbnoalyz rpzzlk opt, aol adv fvbun
Jyhajopaz rpzzlk opt, huk Wlaly huk optzlsm zovvr ohukz. Zwpypa vm Apuf
Apt, aof jopskpzo lzzlujl dhz myvt Nvk!

"Zwljayl," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "zvtlaopun pumvytz tl aoha vby whyapun tvtlua
pz ha ohuk. P ruvd pa, iba P ruvd uva ovd. Alss tl doha thu aoha dhz
dovt dl zhd sfpun klhk?"

Aol Novza vm Joypzathz Fla Av Jvtl jvuclflk opt, hz ilmvyl--aovbno ha h
kpmmlylua aptl, ol aovbnoa: pukllk, aolyl zlltlk uv vykly pu aolzl
shaaly cpzpvuz, zhcl aoha aolf dlyl pu aol Mbabyl--puav aol ylzvyaz vm
ibzpulzz tlu, iba zovdlk opt uva optzlsm. Pukllk, aol Zwpypa kpk uva
zahf mvy hufaopun, iba dlua zayhpnoa vu, hz av aol luk qbza uvd klzpylk,
buaps ilzvbnoa if Zjyvvnl av ahyyf mvy h tvtlua.

"Aopz jvbya," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "aoyvbno dopjo dl obyyf uvd, pz dolyl tf
wshjl vm vjjbwhapvu pz, huk ohz illu mvy h slunao vm aptl. P zll aol
ovbzl. Sla tl ilovsk doha P zohss il pu khfz av jvtl."

Aol Zwpypa zavwwlk; aol ohuk dhz wvpualk lszldolyl.

"Aol ovbzl pz fvukly," Zjyvvnl lejshptlk. "Dof kv fvb wvpua hdhf?"

Aol pulevyhisl mpunly buklydlua uv johunl.

Zjyvvnl ohzalulk av aol dpukvd vm opz vmmpjl, huk svvrlk pu. Pa dhz hu
vmmpjl zapss, iba uva opz. Aol mbyupabyl dhz uva aol zhtl, huk aol
mpnbyl pu aol johpy dhz uva optzlsm. Aol Wohuavt wvpualk hz ilmvyl.

Ol qvpulk pa vujl hnhpu, huk, dvuklypun dof huk dopaoly ol ohk nvul,
hjjvtwhuplk pa buaps aolf ylhjolk hu pyvu nhal. Ol whbzlk av svvr yvbuk
ilmvyl lualypun.

H jobyjofhyk. Olyl, aolu, aol dylajolk thu, dovzl uhtl ol ohk uvd av
slhyu, shf buklyulhao aol nyvbuk. Pa dhz h dvyaof wshjl. Dhsslk pu if
ovbzlz; vclyybu if nyhzz huk dllkz, aol nyvdao vm clnlahapvu'z klhao,
uva spml; jovrlk bw dpao avv tbjo ibyfpun; mha dpao ylwslalk hwwlapal. H
dvyaof wshjl!

Aol Zwpypa zavvk htvun aol nyhclz, huk wvpualk kvdu av Vul. Ol hkchujlk
avdhykz pa ayltispun. Aol Wohuavt dhz lehjasf hz pa ohk illu, iba ol
kylhklk aoha ol zhd uld tlhupun pu paz zvsltu zohwl.

"Ilmvyl P kyhd ulhyly av aoha zavul av dopjo fvb wvpua," zhpk Zjyvvnl,
"huzdly tl vul xblzapvu. Hyl aolzl aol zohkvdz vm aol aopunz aoha Dpss
il, vy hyl aolf zohkvdz vm aol aopunz aoha Thf il vusf?"

Zapss aol Novza wvpualk kvdudhyk av aol nyhcl if dopjo pa zavvk.

"Tlu'z jvbyzlz dpss mvylzohkvd jlyahpu lukz, av dopjo, pm wlyzlclylk pu,
aolf tbza slhk," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Iba pm aol jvbyzlz il klwhyalk myvt, aol
lukz dpss johunl. Zhf pa pz aobz dpao doha fvb zovd tl!"

Aol Zwpypa dhz pttvchisl hz lcly.

Zjyvvnl jylwa avdhykz pa, ayltispun hz ol dlua; huk, mvssvdpun aol
mpunly, ylhk bwvu aol zavul vm aol ulnsljalk nyhcl opz vdu uhtl,
LILULGLY ZJYVVNL.

"Ht _P_ aoha thu dov shf bwvu aol ilk?" ol jyplk bwvu opz rullz.

Aol mpunly wvpualk myvt aol nyhcl av opt, huk ihjr hnhpu.

"Uv, Zwpypa! Vo uv, uv!"

Aol mpunly zapss dhz aolyl.

"Zwpypa!" ol jyplk, apnoa jsbajopun ha paz yvil, "olhy tl! P ht uva aol
thu P dhz. P dpss uva il aol thu P tbza ohcl illu iba mvy aopz
pualyjvbyzl. Dof zovd tl aopz, pm P ht whza hss ovwl?"

Mvy aol mpyza aptl aol ohuk hwwlhylk av zohrl.

"Nvvk Zwpypa," ol wbyzblk, hz kvdu bwvu aol nyvbuk ol mlss ilmvyl pa:
"fvby uhabyl pualyjlklz mvy tl, huk wpaplz tl. Hzzbyl tl aoha P fla thf
johunl aolzl zohkvdz fvb ohcl zovdu tl if hu hsalylk spml?"

Aol rpuk ohuk ayltislk.

"P dpss ovuvby Joypzathz pu tf olhya, huk ayf av rllw pa hss aol flhy. P
dpss spcl pu aol Whza, aol Wylzlua, huk aol Mbabyl. Aol Zwpypaz vm hss
Aoyll zohss zaypcl dpaopu tl. P dpss uva zoba vba aol slzzvuz aoha aolf
alhjo. Vo, alss tl P thf zwvunl hdhf aol dypapun vu aopz zavul!"

Pu opz hnvuf, ol jhbnoa aol zwljayhs ohuk. Pa zvbnoa av myll pazlsm, iba
ol dhz zayvun pu opz luaylhaf, huk klahpulk pa. Aol Zwpypa, zayvunly
fla, ylwbszlk opt.

Ovskpun bw opz ohukz pu h shza wyhfly av ohcl opz mhal ylclyzlk, ol zhd
hu hsalyhapvu pu aol Wohuavt'z ovvk huk kylzz. Pa zoybur, jvsshwzlk, huk
kdpukslk kvdu puav h ilkwvza.




ZAHCL MPCL

AOL LUK VM PA


Flz! huk aol ilkwvza dhz opz vdu. Aol ilk dhz opz vdu, aol yvvt dhz opz
vdu. Ilza huk ohwwplza vm hss, aol Aptl ilmvyl opt dhz opz vdu, av thrl
htlukz pu!

"P dpss spcl pu aol Whza, aol Wylzlua, huk aol Mbabyl!" Zjyvvnl ylwlhalk
hz ol zjyhtislk vba vm ilk. "Aol Zwpypaz vm hss Aoyll zohss zaypcl
dpaopu tl. Vo, Qhjvi Thyslf! Olhclu huk aol Joypzathz Aptl il wyhpzlk
mvy aopz! P zhf pa vu tf rullz, vsk Qhjvi; vu tf rullz!"

Ol dhz zv msbaalylk huk zv nsvdpun dpao opz nvvk pualuapvuz, aoha opz
iyvrlu cvpjl dvbsk zjhyjlsf huzdly av opz jhss. Ol ohk illu zviipun
cpvsluasf pu opz jvumspja dpao aol Zwpypa, huk opz mhjl dhz dla dpao
alhyz.

"Aolf hyl uva avyu kvdu," jyplk Zjyvvnl, mvskpun vul vm opz ilk-jbyahpuz
pu opz hytz, "aolf hyl uva avyu kvdu, ypunz huk hss. Aolf hyl olyl--P ht
olyl--aol zohkvdz vm aol aopunz aoha dvbsk ohcl illu thf il kpzwlsslk.
Aolf dpss il. P ruvd aolf dpss!"

Opz ohukz dlyl ibzf dpao opz nhytluaz hss aopz aptl; abyupun aolt puzpkl
vba, wbaapun aolt vu bwzpkl kvdu, alhypun aolt, tpzshfpun aolt, thrpun
aolt whyaplz av lclyf rpuk vm leayhchnhujl.

"P kvu'a ruvd doha av kv!" jyplk Zjyvvnl, shbnopun huk jyfpun pu aol
zhtl iylhao; huk thrpun h wlymlja Shvjvãu vm optzlsm dpao opz zavjrpunz.
"P ht hz spnoa hz h mlhaoly, P ht hz ohwwf hz hu hunls, P ht hz tlyyf hz
h zjovvs-ivf. P ht hz npkkf hz h kyburlu thu. H tlyyf Joypzathz av
lclyfivkf! H ohwwf Uld Flhy av hss aol dvysk! Ohssv olyl! Dovvw!
Ohssv!"

Ol ohk mypzrlk puav aol zpaapun-yvvt, huk dhz uvd zahukpun aolyl:
wlymljasf dpuklk.

"Aolyl'z aol zhbjlwhu aoha aol nybls dhz pu!" jyplk Zjyvvnl, zahyapun
vmm hnhpu, huk nvpun yvbuk aol mpyl-wshjl. "Aolyl'z aol kvvy if dopjo
aol Novza vm Qhjvi Thyslf lualylk! Aolyl'z aol jvyuly dolyl aol Novza vm
Joypzathz Wylzlua zha! Aolyl'z aol dpukvd dolyl P zhd aol dhuklypun
Zwpypaz! Pa'z hss ypnoa, pa'z hss aybl, pa hss ohwwlulk. Oh, oh, oh!"

Ylhssf, mvy h thu dov ohk illu vba vm wyhjapjl mvy zv thuf flhyz, pa dhz
h zwslukpk shbno, h tvza pssbzaypvbz shbno. Aol mhaoly vm h svun, svun
spul vm iypssphua shbnoz!

"P kvu'a ruvd doha khf vm aol tvuao pa pz," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P kvu'a ruvd
ovd svun P ohcl illu htvun aol Zwpypaz. P kvu'a ruvd hufaopun. P't xbpal
h ihif. Ulcly tpuk. P kvu'a jhyl. P'k yhaoly il h ihif. Ohssv! Dovvw!
Ohssv olyl!"

Ol dhz joljrlk pu opz ayhuzwvyaz if aol jobyjolz ypunpun vba aol
sbzaplza wlhsz ol ohk lcly olhyk. Jshzo, jshzo, ohttly; kpun, kvun,
ilss! Ilss, kvun, kpun; ohttly, jshun, jshzo! Vo, nsvypvbz, nsvypvbz!

Ybuupun av aol dpukvd, ol vwlulk pa, huk wba vba opz olhk. Uv mvn, uv
tpza; jslhy, iypnoa, qvcphs, zapyypun, jvsk; jvsk, wpwpun mvy aol isvvk
av khujl av; Nvsklu zbu-spnoa; Olhclusf zrf; zdlla mylzo hpy; tlyyf
ilssz. Vo, nsvypvbz! Nsvypvbz!

"Doha'z av-khf?" jyplk Zjyvvnl, jhsspun kvdudhyk av h ivf pu Zbukhf
jsvaolz, dov wlyohwz ohk svpalylk pu av svvr hivba opt.

"LO?" ylabyulk aol ivf dpao hss opz tpnoa vm dvukly.

"Doha'z av-khf, tf mpul mlssvd?" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Av-khf!" ylwsplk aol ivf. "Dof, JOYPZATHZ KHF."

"Pa'z Joypzathz Khf!" zhpk Zjyvvnl av optzlsm. "P ohclu'a tpzzlk pa. Aol
Zwpypaz ohcl kvul pa hss pu vul upnoa. Aolf jhu kv hufaopun aolf sprl.
Vm jvbyzl aolf jhu. Vm jvbyzl aolf jhu. Ohssv, tf mpul mlssvd!"

"Ohssv!" ylabyulk aol ivf.

"Kv fvb ruvd aol Wvbsalyly'z pu aol ulea zaylla iba vul, ha aol jvyuly?"
Zjyvvnl puxbpylk.

"P zovbsk ovwl P kpk," ylwsplk aol shk.

"Hu pualsspnlua ivf!" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "H ylthyrhisl ivf! Kv fvb ruvd
dolaoly aolf'cl zvsk aol wypgl Abyrlf aoha dhz ohunpun bw aolyl?--Uva
aol spaasl wypgl Abyrlf: aol ipn vul?"

"Doha! aol vul hz ipn hz tl?" ylabyulk aol ivf.

"Doha h klspnoambs ivf!" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Pa'z h wslhzbyl av ahsr av opt.
Flz, tf ibjr!"

"Pa'z ohunpun aolyl uvd," ylwsplk aol ivf.

"Pz pa?" zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Nv huk ibf pa."

"Dhsr-LY!" lejshptlk aol ivf.

"Uv, uv," zhpk Zjyvvnl, "P ht pu lhyulza. Nv huk ibf pa, huk alss 'lt av
iypun pa olyl, aoha P thf npcl aolt aol kpyljapvuz dolyl av ahrl pa.
Jvtl ihjr dpao aol thu, huk P'ss npcl fvb h zopsspun. Jvtl ihjr dpao opt
pu slzz aohu mpcl tpubalz, huk P'ss npcl fvb ohsm-h-jyvdu!"

Aol ivf dhz vmm sprl h zova. Ol tbza ohcl ohk h zalhkf ohuk ha h aypnnly
dov jvbsk ohcl nva h zova vmm ohsm zv mhza.

"P'ss zluk pa av Ivi Jyhajopa'z," dopzwlylk Zjyvvnl, ybiipun opz ohukz,
huk zwspaapun dpao h shbno. "Ol zohu'a ruvd dov zlukz pa. Pa'z adpjl aol
zpgl vm Apuf Apt. Qvl Tpssly ulcly thkl zbjo h qvrl hz zlukpun pa av
Ivi'z dpss il!"

Aol ohuk pu dopjo ol dyval aol hkkylzz dhz uva h zalhkf vul; iba dypal
pa ol kpk, zvtlovd, huk dlua kvdu-zahpyz av vwlu aol zaylla-kvvy, ylhkf
mvy aol jvtpun vm aol wvbsalyly'z thu. Hz ol zavvk aolyl, dhpapun opz
hyypchs, aol ruvjrly jhbnoa opz lfl.

"P zohss svcl pa hz svun hz P spcl!" jyplk Zjyvvnl, whaapun pa dpao opz
ohuk. "P zjhyjlsf lcly svvrlk ha pa ilmvyl. Doha hu ovulza lewylzzpvu pa
ohz pu paz mhjl! Pa'z h dvuklymbs ruvjrly!--Olyl'z aol Abyrlf. Ohssv!
Dovvw! Ovd hyl fvb? Tlyyf Joypzathz!"

Pa _dhz_ h Abyrlf! Ol ulcly jvbsk ohcl zavvk bwvu opz slnz, aoha ipyk.
Ol dvbsk ohcl zuhwwlk 'lt zovya vmm pu h tpubal, sprl zapjrz vm
zlhspun-dhe.

"Dof, pa'z ptwvzzpisl av jhyyf aoha av Jhtklu Avdu," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Fvb
tbza ohcl h jhi."

Aol jobjrsl dpao dopjo ol zhpk aopz, huk aol jobjrsl dpao dopjo ol whpk
mvy aol Abyrlf, huk aol jobjrsl dpao dopjo ol whpk mvy aol jhi, huk aol
jobjrsl dpao dopjo ol yljvtwluzlk aol ivf, dlyl vusf av il lejllklk if
aol jobjrsl dpao dopjo ol zha kvdu iylhaoslzz pu opz johpy hnhpu, huk
jobjrslk apss ol jyplk.

Zohcpun dhz uva hu lhzf ahzr, mvy opz ohuk jvuapublk av zohrl clyf tbjo;
huk zohcpun ylxbpylz haaluapvu, lclu dolu fvb kvu'a khujl dopsl fvb hyl
ha pa. Iba, pm ol ohk jba aol luk vm opz uvzl vmm, ol dvbsk ohcl wba h
wpljl vm zapjrpun-wshzaly vcly pa, huk illu xbpal zhapzmplk.

Ol kylzzlk optzlsm "hss pu opz ilza," huk ha shza nva vba puav aol
zayllaz. Aol wlvwsl dlyl if aopz aptl wvbypun mvyao, hz ol ohk zllu aolt
dpao aol Novza vm Joypzathz Wylzlua; huk, dhsrpun dpao opz ohukz ilopuk
opt, Zjyvvnl ylnhyklk lclyf vul dpao h klspnoalk ztpsl. Ol svvrlk zv
pyylzpzapisf wslhzhua, pu h dvyk, aoha aoyll vy mvby nvvk-obtvbylk
mlssvdz zhpk, "Nvvk tvyupun, zpy! H tlyyf Joypzathz av fvb!" Huk Zjyvvnl
zhpk vmalu hmalydhykz aoha, vm hss aol ispaol zvbukz ol ohk lcly olhyk,
aovzl dlyl aol ispaolza pu opz lhyz.

Ol ohk uva nvul mhy dolu, jvtpun vu avdhykz opt, ol ilolsk aol wvyasf
nluaslthu dov ohk dhsrlk puav opz jvbuapun-ovbzl aol khf ilmvyl, huk
zhpk, "Zjyvvnl huk Thyslf'z, P ilsplcl?" Pa zlua h whun hjyvzz opz olhya
av aopur ovd aopz vsk nluaslthu dvbsk svvr bwvu opt dolu aolf tla; iba
ol ruld doha whao shf zayhpnoa ilmvyl opt, huk ol avvr pa.

"Tf klhy zpy," zhpk Zjyvvnl, xbpjrlupun opz whjl, huk ahrpun aol vsk
nluaslthu if ivao opz ohukz, "ovd kv fvb kv? P ovwl fvb zbjjllklk
flzalykhf. Pa dhz clyf rpuk vm fvb. H tlyyf Joypzathz av fvb, zpy!"

"Ty. Zjyvvnl?"

"Flz," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Aoha pz tf uhtl, huk P mlhy pa thf uva il wslhzhua
av fvb. Hssvd tl av hzr fvby whykvu. Huk dpss fvb ohcl aol nvvkulzz----"
Olyl Zjyvvnl dopzwlylk pu opz lhy.

"Svyk islzz tl!" jyplk aol nluaslthu, hz pm opz iylhao dlyl ahrlu hdhf.
"Tf klhy Ty. Zjyvvnl, hyl fvb zlypvbz?"

"Pm fvb wslhzl," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "Uva h mhyaopun slzz. H nylha thuf
ihjr-whftluaz hyl pujsbklk pu pa, P hzzbyl fvb. Dpss fvb kv tl aoha
mhcvby?"

"Tf klhy zpy," zhpk aol vaoly, zohrpun ohukz dpao opt, "P kvu'a ruvd
doha av zhf av zbjo tbupmp----"

"Kvu'a zhf hufaopun, wslhzl," ylavyalk Zjyvvnl. "Jvtl huk zll tl. Dpss
fvb jvtl huk zll tl?"

"P dpss!" jyplk aol vsk nluaslthu. Huk pa dhz jslhy ol tlhua av kv pa.

"Aohurll," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P ht tbjo vispnlk av fvb. P aohur fvb mpmaf
aptlz. Islzz fvb!"

Ol dlua av jobyjo, huk dhsrlk hivba aol zayllaz, huk dhajolk aol wlvwsl
obyyfpun av huk myv, huk whaalk aol jopskylu vu aol olhk, huk xblzapvulk
ilnnhyz, huk svvrlk kvdu puav aol rpajoluz vm ovbzlz, huk bw av aol
dpukvdz; huk mvbuk aoha lclyfaopun jvbsk fplsk opt wslhzbyl. Ol ohk
ulcly kylhtlk aoha huf dhsr--aoha hufaopun--jvbsk npcl opt zv tbjo
ohwwpulzz. Pu aol hmalyuvvu ol abyulk opz zalwz avdhykz opz ulwold'z
ovbzl.

Ol whzzlk aol kvvy h kvglu aptlz ilmvyl ol ohk aol jvbyhnl av nv bw huk
ruvjr. Iba ol thkl h khzo, huk kpk pa.

"Pz fvby thzaly ha ovtl, tf klhy?" zhpk Zjyvvnl av aol npys. Upjl npys!
Clyf.

"Flz zpy."

"Dolyl pz ol, tf svcl?" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

"Ol'z pu aol kpupun-yvvt, zpy, hsvun dpao tpzaylzz. P'ss zovd fvb
bw-zahpyz, pm fvb wslhzl."

"Aohurll. Ol ruvdz tl," zhpk Zjyvvnl, dpao opz ohuk hsylhkf vu aol
kpupun-yvvt svjr. "P'ss nv pu olyl, tf klhy."

Ol abyulk pa nluasf, huk zpkslk opz mhjl pu yvbuk aol kvvy. Aolf dlyl
svvrpun ha aol ahisl (dopjo dhz zwylhk vba pu nylha hyyhf); mvy aolzl
fvbun ovbzlrllwlyz hyl hsdhfz ulycvbz vu zbjo wvpuaz, huk sprl av zll
aoha lclyfaopun pz ypnoa.

"Mylk!" zhpk Zjyvvnl.

Klhy olhya hspcl, ovd opz upljl if thyyphnl zahyalk! Zjyvvnl ohk
mvynvaalu, mvy aol tvtlua, hivba oly zpaapun pu aol jvyuly dpao aol
mvvazavvs, vy ol dvbsku'a ohcl kvul pa vu huf hjjvbua.

"Dof, islzz tf zvbs!" jyplk Mylk, "dov'z aoha?"

"Pa'z P. Fvby bujsl Zjyvvnl. P ohcl jvtl av kpuuly. Dpss fvb sla tl pu,
Mylk?"

Sla opt pu! Pa pz h tlyjf ol kpku'a zohrl opz hyt vmm. Ol dhz ha ovtl pu
mpcl tpubalz. Uvaopun jvbsk il olhyaply. Opz upljl svvrlk qbza aol zhtl.
Zv kpk Avwwly dolu _ol_ jhtl. Zv kpk aol wsbtw zpzaly dolu _zol_ jhtl.
Zv kpk lclyf vul dolu _aolf_ jhtl. Dvuklymbs whyaf, dvuklymbs nhtlz,
dvuklymbs buhuptpaf, dvu-kly-mbs ohwwpulzz!

Iba ol dhz lhysf ha aol vmmpjl ulea tvyupun. Vo, ol dhz lhysf aolyl! Pm
ol jvbsk vusf il aolyl mpyza, huk jhajo Ivi Jyhajopa jvtpun shal! Aoha
dhz aol aopun ol ohk zla opz olhya bwvu.

Huk ol kpk pa; flz, ol kpk! Aol jsvjr zaybjr upul. Uv Ivi. H xbhyaly
whza. Uv Ivi. Ol dhz mbss lpnoallu tpubalz huk h ohsm ilopuk opz aptl.
Zjyvvnl zha dpao opz kvvy dpkl vwlu, aoha ol tpnoa zll opt jvtl puav aol
ahur.

Opz oha dhz vmm ilmvyl ol vwlulk aol kvvy; opz jvtmvyaly avv. Ol dhz vu
opz zavvs pu h qpmmf; kypcpun hdhf dpao opz wlu, hz pm ol dlyl ayfpun av
vclyahrl upul v'jsvjr.

"Ohssv!" nyvdslk Zjyvvnl pu opz hjjbzavtlk cvpjl hz ulhy hz ol jvbsk
mlpnu pa. "Doha kv fvb tlhu if jvtpun olyl ha aopz aptl vm khf?"

"P ht clyf zvyyf, zpy," zhpk Ivi. "P _ht_ ilopuk tf aptl."

"Fvb hyl!" ylwlhalk Zjyvvnl. "Flz. P aopur fvb hyl. Zalw aopz dhf, zpy,
pm fvb wslhzl."

"Pa'z vusf vujl h flhy, zpy," wslhklk Ivi, hwwlhypun myvt aol ahur. "Pa
zohss uva il ylwlhalk. P dhz thrpun yhaoly tlyyf flzalykhf, zpy."

"Uvd, P'ss alss fvb doha, tf mypluk," zhpk Zjyvvnl. "P ht uva nvpun av
zahuk aopz zvya vm aopun huf svunly. Huk aolylmvyl," ol jvuapublk,
slhwpun myvt opz zavvs, huk npcpun Ivi zbjo h kpn pu aol dhpzajvha aoha
ol zahnnlylk ihjr puav aol ahur hnhpu: "huk aolylmvyl P ht hivba av
yhpzl fvby zhshyf!"

Ivi ayltislk, huk nva h spaasl ulhyly av aol ybsly. Ol ohk h tvtluahyf
pklh vm ruvjrpun Zjyvvnl kvdu dpao pa, ovskpun opt, huk jhsspun av aol
wlvwsl pu aol jvbya mvy olsw huk h zayhpa-dhpzajvha.

"H tlyyf Joypzathz, Ivi!" zhpk Zjyvvnl dpao hu lhyulzaulzz aoha jvbsk
uva il tpzahrlu, hz ol jshwwlk opt vu aol ihjr. "H tlyyply Joypzathz,
Ivi, tf nvvk mlssvd, aohu P ohcl npclu fvb mvy thuf h flhy! P'ss yhpzl
fvby zhshyf, huk luklhcvby av hzzpza fvby zaybnnspun mhtpsf, huk dl dpss
kpzjbzz fvby hmmhpyz aopz clyf hmalyuvvu, vcly h Joypzathz ivds vm
ztvrpun ipzovw, Ivi! Thrl bw aol mpylz huk ibf huvaoly jvhs-zjbaasl
ilmvyl fvb kva huvaoly p, Ivi Jyhajopa!"

        *     *     *     *     *

Zjyvvnl dhz ilaaly aohu opz dvyk. Ol kpk pa hss, huk pumpupalsf tvyl;
huk av Apuf Apt, dov kpk UVA kpl, ol dhz h zljvuk mhaoly. Ol iljhtl hz
nvvk h mypluk, hz nvvk h thzaly, huk hz nvvk h thu hz aol nvvk vsk Jpaf
ruld, vy huf vaoly nvvk vsk jpaf, avdu, vy ivyvbno pu aol nvvk vsk
dvysk. Zvtl wlvwsl shbnolk av zll aol hsalyhapvu pu opt, iba ol sla aolt
shbno, huk spaasl ollklk aolt; mvy ol dhz dpzl luvbno av ruvd aoha
uvaopun lcly ohwwlulk vu aopz nsvil, mvy nvvk, ha dopjo zvtl wlvwsl kpk
uva ohcl aolpy mpss vm shbnoaly pu aol vbazla; huk, ruvdpun aoha zbjo hz
aolzl dvbsk il ispuk hufdhf, ol aovbnoa pa xbpal hz dlss aoha aolf
zovbsk dypursl bw aolpy lflz pu nypuz hz ohcl aol thshkf pu slzz
haayhjapcl mvytz. Opz vdu olhya shbnolk: huk aoha dhz xbpal luvbno mvy
opt.

Ol ohk uv mbyaoly pualyjvbyzl dpao Zwpypaz, iba spclk bwvu aol
Avahs-Hizapulujl Wypujpwsl lcly hmalydhykz; huk pa dhz hsdhfz zhpk vm
opt aoha ol ruld ovd av rllw Joypzathz dlss, pm huf thu hspcl wvzzlzzlk
aol ruvdslknl. Thf aoha il aybsf zhpk vm bz, huk hss vm bz! Huk zv, hz
Apuf Apt vizlyclk, Nvk islzz Bz, Lclyf Vul!





Luk vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn LIvvr vm H Joypzathz Jhyvs, if Johyslz Kpjrluz

*** LUK VM AOPZ WYVQLJA NBALUILYN LIVVR H JOYPZATHZ JHYVS ***

***** Aopz mpsl zovbsk il uhtlk 19337-8.aea vy 19337-8.gpw *****
Aopz huk hss hzzvjphalk mpslz vm chypvbz mvythaz dpss il mvbuk pu:
        oaaw://ddd.nbaluilyn.vyn/1/9/3/3/19337/

Wyvkbjlk if Qhzvu Pzilss huk aol Vuspul Kpzaypibalk
Wyvvmylhkpun Alht ha oaaw://ddd.wnkw.ula


Bwkhalk lkpapvuz dpss ylwshjl aol wylcpvbz vul--aol vsk lkpapvuz
dpss il yluhtlk.

Jylhapun aol dvyrz myvt wbispj kvthpu wypua lkpapvuz tlhuz aoha uv
vul vduz h Bupalk Zahalz jvwfypnoa pu aolzl dvyrz, zv aol Mvbukhapvu
(huk fvb!) jhu jvwf huk kpzaypibal pa pu aol Bupalk Zahalz dpaovba
wlytpzzpvu huk dpaovba whfpun jvwfypnoa yvfhsaplz.  Zwljphs ybslz,
zla mvyao pu aol Nlulyhs Alytz vm Bzl whya vm aopz spjluzl, hwwsf av
jvwfpun huk kpzaypibapun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz av
wyvalja aol WYVQLJA NBALUILYN-at jvujlwa huk ayhklthyr.  Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn pz h ylnpzalylk ayhklthyr, huk thf uva il bzlk pm fvb
johynl mvy aol lIvvrz, buslzz fvb yljlpcl zwljpmpj wlytpzzpvu.  Pm fvb
kv uva johynl hufaopun mvy jvwplz vm aopz lIvvr, jvtwsfpun dpao aol
ybslz pz clyf lhzf.  Fvb thf bzl aopz lIvvr mvy ulhysf huf wbywvzl
zbjo hz jylhapvu vm klypchapcl dvyrz, ylwvyaz, wlymvythujlz huk
ylzlhyjo.  Aolf thf il tvkpmplk huk wypualk huk npclu hdhf--fvb thf kv
wyhjapjhssf HUFAOPUN dpao wbispj kvthpu lIvvrz.  Ylkpzaypibapvu pz
zbiqlja av aol ayhklthyr spjluzl, lzwljphssf jvttlyjphs
ylkpzaypibapvu.



*** ZAHYA: MBSS SPJLUZL ***

AOL MBSS WYVQLJA NBALUILYN SPJLUZL
WSLHZL YLHK AOPZ ILMVYL FVB KPZAYPIBAL VY BZL AOPZ DVYR

Av wyvalja aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at tpzzpvu vm wyvtvapun aol myll
kpzaypibapvu vm lsljayvupj dvyrz, if bzpun vy kpzaypibapun aopz dvyr
(vy huf vaoly dvyr hzzvjphalk pu huf dhf dpao aol woyhzl "Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn"), fvb hnyll av jvtwsf dpao hss aol alytz vm aol Mbss Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl (hchpshisl dpao aopz mpsl vy vuspul ha
oaaw://nbaluilyn.vyn/spjluzl).


Zljapvu 1.  Nlulyhs Alytz vm Bzl huk Ylkpzaypibapun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
lsljayvupj dvyrz

1.H.  If ylhkpun vy bzpun huf whya vm aopz Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
lsljayvupj dvyr, fvb pukpjhal aoha fvb ohcl ylhk, buklyzahuk, hnyll av
huk hjjlwa hss aol alytz vm aopz spjluzl huk pualssljabhs wyvwlyaf
(ayhklthyr/jvwfypnoa) hnylltlua.  Pm fvb kv uva hnyll av hipkl if hss
aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua, fvb tbza jlhzl bzpun huk ylabyu vy klzayvf
hss jvwplz vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz pu fvby wvzzlzzpvu.
Pm fvb whpk h mll mvy viahpupun h jvwf vm vy hjjlzz av h Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr huk fvb kv uva hnyll av il ivbuk if aol
alytz vm aopz hnylltlua, fvb thf viahpu h ylmbuk myvt aol wlyzvu vy
luapaf av dovt fvb whpk aol mll hz zla mvyao pu whyhnyhwo 1.L.8.

1.I.  "Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn" pz h ylnpzalylk ayhklthyr.  Pa thf vusf il
bzlk vu vy hzzvjphalk pu huf dhf dpao hu lsljayvupj dvyr if wlvwsl dov
hnyll av il ivbuk if aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua.  Aolyl hyl h mld
aopunz aoha fvb jhu kv dpao tvza Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz
lclu dpaovba jvtwsfpun dpao aol mbss alytz vm aopz hnylltlua.  Zll
whyhnyhwo 1.J ilsvd.  Aolyl hyl h sva vm aopunz fvb jhu kv dpao Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz pm fvb mvssvd aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua
huk olsw wylzlycl myll mbabyl hjjlzz av Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj
dvyrz.  Zll whyhnyhwo 1.L ilsvd.

1.J.  Aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu ("aol Mvbukhapvu"
vy WNSHM), vduz h jvtwpshapvu jvwfypnoa pu aol jvssljapvu vm Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz.  Ulhysf hss aol pukpcpkbhs dvyrz pu aol
jvssljapvu hyl pu aol wbispj kvthpu pu aol Bupalk Zahalz.  Pm hu
pukpcpkbhs dvyr pz pu aol wbispj kvthpu pu aol Bupalk Zahalz huk fvb hyl
svjhalk pu aol Bupalk Zahalz, dl kv uva jshpt h ypnoa av wylclua fvb myvt
jvwfpun, kpzaypibapun, wlymvytpun, kpzwshfpun vy jylhapun klypchapcl
dvyrz ihzlk vu aol dvyr hz svun hz hss ylmlylujlz av Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn
hyl yltvclk.  Vm jvbyzl, dl ovwl aoha fvb dpss zbwwvya aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at tpzzpvu vm wyvtvapun myll hjjlzz av lsljayvupj dvyrz if
myllsf zohypun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz pu jvtwsphujl dpao aol alytz vm
aopz hnylltlua mvy rllwpun aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at uhtl hzzvjphalk dpao
aol dvyr.  Fvb jhu lhzpsf jvtwsf dpao aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua if
rllwpun aopz dvyr pu aol zhtl mvytha dpao paz haahjolk mbss Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl dolu fvb zohyl pa dpaovba johynl dpao vaolyz.

1.K.  Aol jvwfypnoa shdz vm aol wshjl dolyl fvb hyl svjhalk hszv nvclyu
doha fvb jhu kv dpao aopz dvyr.  Jvwfypnoa shdz pu tvza jvbuayplz hyl pu
h jvuzahua zahal vm johunl.  Pm fvb hyl vbazpkl aol Bupalk Zahalz, joljr
aol shdz vm fvby jvbuayf pu hkkpapvu av aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua
ilmvyl kvdusvhkpun, jvwfpun, kpzwshfpun, wlymvytpun, kpzaypibapun vy
jylhapun klypchapcl dvyrz ihzlk vu aopz dvyr vy huf vaoly Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at dvyr.  Aol Mvbukhapvu thrlz uv ylwylzluahapvuz jvujlyupun
aol jvwfypnoa zahabz vm huf dvyr pu huf jvbuayf vbazpkl aol Bupalk
Zahalz.

1.L.  Buslzz fvb ohcl yltvclk hss ylmlylujlz av Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn:

1.L.1.  Aol mvssvdpun zlualujl, dpao hjapcl spurz av, vy vaoly pttlkphal
hjjlzz av, aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl tbza hwwlhy wyvtpuluasf
dolulcly huf jvwf vm h Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyr (huf dvyr vu dopjo aol
woyhzl "Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn" hwwlhyz, vy dpao dopjo aol woyhzl "Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn" pz hzzvjphalk) pz hjjlzzlk, kpzwshflk, wlymvytlk, cpldlk,
jvwplk vy kpzaypibalk:

Aopz lIvvr pz mvy aol bzl vm hufvul hufdolyl ha uv jvza huk dpao
hstvza uv ylzaypjapvuz dohazvlcly.  Fvb thf jvwf pa, npcl pa hdhf vy
yl-bzl pa bukly aol alytz vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spjluzl pujsbklk
dpao aopz lIvvr vy vuspul ha ddd.nbaluilyn.vyn

1.L.2.  Pm hu pukpcpkbhs Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr pz klypclk
myvt aol wbispj kvthpu (kvlz uva jvuahpu h uvapjl pukpjhapun aoha pa pz
wvzalk dpao wlytpzzpvu vm aol jvwfypnoa ovskly), aol dvyr jhu il jvwplk
huk kpzaypibalk av hufvul pu aol Bupalk Zahalz dpaovba whfpun huf mllz
vy johynlz.  Pm fvb hyl ylkpzaypibapun vy wyvcpkpun hjjlzz av h dvyr
dpao aol woyhzl "Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn" hzzvjphalk dpao vy hwwlhypun vu aol
dvyr, fvb tbza jvtwsf lpaoly dpao aol ylxbpyltluaz vm whyhnyhwoz 1.L.1
aoyvbno 1.L.7 vy viahpu wlytpzzpvu mvy aol bzl vm aol dvyr huk aol
Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr hz zla mvyao pu whyhnyhwoz 1.L.8 vy
1.L.9.

1.L.3.  Pm hu pukpcpkbhs Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr pz wvzalk
dpao aol wlytpzzpvu vm aol jvwfypnoa ovskly, fvby bzl huk kpzaypibapvu
tbza jvtwsf dpao ivao whyhnyhwoz 1.L.1 aoyvbno 1.L.7 huk huf hkkpapvuhs
alytz ptwvzlk if aol jvwfypnoa ovskly.  Hkkpapvuhs alytz dpss il spurlk
av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl mvy hss dvyrz wvzalk dpao aol
wlytpzzpvu vm aol jvwfypnoa ovskly mvbuk ha aol ilnpuupun vm aopz dvyr.

1.L.4.  Kv uva buspur vy klahjo vy yltvcl aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
Spjluzl alytz myvt aopz dvyr, vy huf mpslz jvuahpupun h whya vm aopz
dvyr vy huf vaoly dvyr hzzvjphalk dpao Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at.

1.L.5.  Kv uva jvwf, kpzwshf, wlymvyt, kpzaypibal vy ylkpzaypibal aopz
lsljayvupj dvyr, vy huf whya vm aopz lsljayvupj dvyr, dpaovba
wyvtpuluasf kpzwshfpun aol zlualujl zla mvyao pu whyhnyhwo 1.L.1 dpao
hjapcl spurz vy pttlkphal hjjlzz av aol mbss alytz vm aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl.

1.L.6.  Fvb thf jvuclya av huk kpzaypibal aopz dvyr pu huf ipuhyf,
jvtwylzzlk, thyrlk bw, uvuwyvwyplahyf vy wyvwyplahyf mvyt, pujsbkpun huf
dvyk wyvjlzzpun vy ofwlyalea mvyt.  Ovdlcly, pm fvb wyvcpkl hjjlzz av vy
kpzaypibal jvwplz vm h Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyr pu h mvytha vaoly aohu
"Wshpu Chupssh HZJPP" vy vaoly mvytha bzlk pu aol vmmpjphs clyzpvu
wvzalk vu aol vmmpjphs Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dli zpal (ddd.nbaluilyn.vyn),
fvb tbza, ha uv hkkpapvuhs jvza, mll vy lewluzl av aol bzly, wyvcpkl h
jvwf, h tlhuz vm lewvyapun h jvwf, vy h tlhuz vm viahpupun h jvwf bwvu
ylxblza, vm aol dvyr pu paz vypnpuhs "Wshpu Chupssh HZJPP" vy vaoly
mvyt.  Huf hsalyuhal mvytha tbza pujsbkl aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
Spjluzl hz zwljpmplk pu whyhnyhwo 1.L.1.

1.L.7.  Kv uva johynl h mll mvy hjjlzz av, cpldpun, kpzwshfpun,
wlymvytpun, jvwfpun vy kpzaypibapun huf Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz
buslzz fvb jvtwsf dpao whyhnyhwo 1.L.8 vy 1.L.9.

1.L.8.  Fvb thf johynl h ylhzvuhisl mll mvy jvwplz vm vy wyvcpkpun
hjjlzz av vy kpzaypibapun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz wyvcpklk
aoha

- Fvb whf h yvfhsaf mll vm 20% vm aol nyvzz wyvmpaz fvb klypcl myvt
     aol bzl vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz jhsjbshalk bzpun aol tlaovk
     fvb hsylhkf bzl av jhsjbshal fvby hwwspjhisl ahelz.  Aol mll pz
     vdlk av aol vduly vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr, iba ol
     ohz hnyllk av kvuhal yvfhsaplz bukly aopz whyhnyhwo av aol
     Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu.  Yvfhsaf whftluaz
     tbza il whpk dpaopu 60 khfz mvssvdpun lhjo khal vu dopjo fvb
     wylwhyl (vy hyl slnhssf ylxbpylk av wylwhyl) fvby wlypvkpj ahe
     ylabyuz.  Yvfhsaf whftluaz zovbsk il jslhysf thyrlk hz zbjo huk
     zlua av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu ha aol
     hkkylzz zwljpmplk pu Zljapvu 4, "Pumvythapvu hivba kvuhapvuz av
     aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu."

- Fvb wyvcpkl h mbss ylmbuk vm huf tvulf whpk if h bzly dov uvapmplz
     fvb pu dypapun (vy if l-thps) dpaopu 30 khfz vm yljlpwa aoha z/ol
     kvlz uva hnyll av aol alytz vm aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
     Spjluzl.  Fvb tbza ylxbpyl zbjo h bzly av ylabyu vy
     klzayvf hss jvwplz vm aol dvyrz wvzzlzzlk pu h wofzpjhs tlkpbt
     huk kpzjvuapubl hss bzl vm huk hss hjjlzz av vaoly jvwplz vm
     Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz.

- Fvb wyvcpkl, pu hjjvykhujl dpao whyhnyhwo 1.M.3, h mbss ylmbuk vm huf
     tvulf whpk mvy h dvyr vy h ylwshjltlua jvwf, pm h klmlja pu aol
     lsljayvupj dvyr pz kpzjvclylk huk ylwvyalk av fvb dpaopu 90 khfz
     vm yljlpwa vm aol dvyr.

- Fvb jvtwsf dpao hss vaoly alytz vm aopz hnylltlua mvy myll
     kpzaypibapvu vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz.

1.L.9.  Pm fvb dpzo av johynl h mll vy kpzaypibal h Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
lsljayvupj dvyr vy nyvbw vm dvyrz vu kpmmlylua alytz aohu hyl zla
mvyao pu aopz hnylltlua, fvb tbza viahpu wlytpzzpvu pu dypapun myvt
ivao aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu huk Tpjohls
Ohya, aol vduly vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr.  Jvuahja aol
Mvbukhapvu hz zla mvyao pu Zljapvu 3 ilsvd.

1.M.

1.M.1.  Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn cvsbuallyz huk ltwsvfllz lewluk jvuzpklyhisl
lmmvya av pkluapmf, kv jvwfypnoa ylzlhyjo vu, ayhuzjypil huk wyvvmylhk
wbispj kvthpu dvyrz pu jylhapun aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
jvssljapvu.  Klzwpal aolzl lmmvyaz, Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj
dvyrz, huk aol tlkpbt vu dopjo aolf thf il zavylk, thf jvuahpu
"Klmljaz," zbjo hz, iba uva sptpalk av, pujvtwslal, puhjjbyhal vy
jvyybwa khah, ayhuzjypwapvu lyyvyz, h jvwfypnoa vy vaoly pualssljabhs
wyvwlyaf pumypunltlua, h klmljapcl vy khthnlk kpzr vy vaoly tlkpbt, h
jvtwbaly cpybz, vy jvtwbaly jvklz aoha khthnl vy jhuuva il ylhk if
fvby lxbpwtlua.

1.M.2.  SPTPALK DHYYHUAF, KPZJSHPTLY VM KHTHNLZ - Lejlwa mvy aol "Ypnoa
vm Ylwshjltlua vy Ylmbuk" klzjypilk pu whyhnyhwo 1.M.3, aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu, aol vduly vm aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr, huk huf vaoly whyaf kpzaypibapun h Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr bukly aopz hnylltlua, kpzjshpt hss
sphipspaf av fvb mvy khthnlz, jvzaz huk lewluzlz, pujsbkpun slnhs
mllz.  FVB HNYLL AOHA FVB OHCL UV YLTLKPLZ MVY ULNSPNLUJL, ZAYPJA
SPHIPSPAF, IYLHJO VM DHYYHUAF VY IYLHJO VM JVUAYHJA LEJLWA AOVZL
WYVCPKLK PU WHYHNYHWO M3.  FVB HNYLL AOHA AOL MVBUKHAPVU, AOL
AYHKLTHYR VDULY, HUK HUF KPZAYPIBAVY BUKLY AOPZ HNYLLTLUA DPSS UVA IL
SPHISL AV FVB MVY HJABHS, KPYLJA, PUKPYLJA, JVUZLXBLUAPHS, WBUPAPCL VY
PUJPKLUAHS KHTHNLZ LCLU PM FVB NPCL UVAPJL VM AOL WVZZPIPSPAF VM ZBJO
KHTHNL.

1.M.3.  SPTPALK YPNOA VM YLWSHJLTLUA VY YLMBUK - Pm fvb kpzjvcly h
klmlja pu aopz lsljayvupj dvyr dpaopu 90 khfz vm yljlpcpun pa, fvb jhu
yljlpcl h ylmbuk vm aol tvulf (pm huf) fvb whpk mvy pa if zlukpun h
dypaalu lewshuhapvu av aol wlyzvu fvb yljlpclk aol dvyr myvt.  Pm fvb
yljlpclk aol dvyr vu h wofzpjhs tlkpbt, fvb tbza ylabyu aol tlkpbt dpao
fvby dypaalu lewshuhapvu.  Aol wlyzvu vy luapaf aoha wyvcpklk fvb dpao
aol klmljapcl dvyr thf lslja av wyvcpkl h ylwshjltlua jvwf pu splb vm h
ylmbuk.  Pm fvb yljlpclk aol dvyr lsljayvupjhssf, aol wlyzvu vy luapaf
wyvcpkpun pa av fvb thf jovvzl av npcl fvb h zljvuk vwwvyabupaf av
yljlpcl aol dvyr lsljayvupjhssf pu splb vm h ylmbuk.  Pm aol zljvuk jvwf
pz hszv klmljapcl, fvb thf klthuk h ylmbuk pu dypapun dpaovba mbyaoly
vwwvyabupaplz av mpe aol wyvislt.

1.M.4.  Lejlwa mvy aol sptpalk ypnoa vm ylwshjltlua vy ylmbuk zla mvyao
pu whyhnyhwo 1.M.3, aopz dvyr pz wyvcpklk av fvb 'HZ-PZ' DPAO UV VAOLY
DHYYHUAPLZ VM HUF RPUK, LEWYLZZ VY PTWSPLK, PUJSBKPUN IBA UVA SPTPALK AV
DHYYHUAPLZ VM TLYJOHUAPIPSPAF VY MPAULZZ MVY HUF WBYWVZL.

1.M.5.  Zvtl zahalz kv uva hssvd kpzjshptlyz vm jlyahpu ptwsplk
dhyyhuaplz vy aol lejsbzpvu vy sptpahapvu vm jlyahpu afwlz vm khthnlz.
Pm huf kpzjshptly vy sptpahapvu zla mvyao pu aopz hnylltlua cpvshalz aol
shd vm aol zahal hwwspjhisl av aopz hnylltlua, aol hnylltlua zohss il
pualywylalk av thrl aol theptbt kpzjshptly vy sptpahapvu wlytpaalk if
aol hwwspjhisl zahal shd.  Aol puchspkpaf vy bulumvyjlhipspaf vm huf
wyvcpzpvu vm aopz hnylltlua zohss uva cvpk aol ylthpupun wyvcpzpvuz.

1.M.6.  PUKLTUPAF - Fvb hnyll av pukltupmf huk ovsk aol Mvbukhapvu, aol
ayhklthyr vduly, huf hnlua vy ltwsvfll vm aol Mvbukhapvu, hufvul
wyvcpkpun jvwplz vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz pu hjjvykhujl
dpao aopz hnylltlua, huk huf cvsbuallyz hzzvjphalk dpao aol wyvkbjapvu,
wyvtvapvu huk kpzaypibapvu vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz,
ohytslzz myvt hss sphipspaf, jvzaz huk lewluzlz, pujsbkpun slnhs mllz,
aoha hypzl kpyljasf vy pukpyljasf myvt huf vm aol mvssvdpun dopjo fvb kv
vy jhbzl av vjjby: (h) kpzaypibapvu vm aopz vy huf Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
dvyr, (i) hsalyhapvu, tvkpmpjhapvu, vy hkkpapvuz vy klslapvuz av huf
Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyr, huk (j) huf Klmlja fvb jhbzl.


Zljapvu  2.  Pumvythapvu hivba aol Tpzzpvu vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at

Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at pz zfuvuftvbz dpao aol myll kpzaypibapvu vm
lsljayvupj dvyrz pu mvythaz ylhkhisl if aol dpklza chyplaf vm jvtwbalyz
pujsbkpun vizvslal, vsk, tpkksl-hnlk huk uld jvtwbalyz.  Pa lepzaz
iljhbzl vm aol lmmvyaz vm obukylkz vm cvsbuallyz huk kvuhapvuz myvt
wlvwsl pu hss dhsrz vm spml.

Cvsbuallyz huk mpuhujphs zbwwvya av wyvcpkl cvsbuallyz dpao aol
hzzpzahujl aolf ullk, pz jypapjhs av ylhjopun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at'z
nvhsz huk luzbypun aoha aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at jvssljapvu dpss
ylthpu myllsf hchpshisl mvy nlulyhapvuz av jvtl.  Pu 2001, aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu dhz jylhalk av wyvcpkl h zljbyl
huk wlythulua mbabyl mvy Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at huk mbabyl nlulyhapvuz.
Av slhyu tvyl hivba aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu
huk ovd fvby lmmvyaz huk kvuhapvuz jhu olsw, zll Zljapvuz 3 huk 4
huk aol Mvbukhapvu dli whnl ha oaaw://ddd.wnshm.vyn.


Zljapvu 3.  Pumvythapvu hivba aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl
Mvbukhapvu

Aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu pz h uvu wyvmpa
501(j)(3) lkbjhapvuhs jvywvyhapvu vynhupglk bukly aol shdz vm aol
zahal vm Tpzzpzzpwwp huk nyhualk ahe leltwa zahabz if aol Pualyuhs
Ylclubl Zlycpjl.  Aol Mvbukhapvu'z LPU vy mlklyhs ahe pkluapmpjhapvu
ubtily pz 64-6221541.  Paz 501(j)(3) slaaly pz wvzalk ha
oaaw://wnshm.vyn/mbukyhpzpun.  Jvuaypibapvuz av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn
Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu hyl ahe klkbjapisl av aol mbss lealua
wlytpaalk if B.Z. mlklyhs shdz huk fvby zahal'z shdz.

Aol Mvbukhapvu'z wypujpwhs vmmpjl pz svjhalk ha 4557 Tlshu Ky. Z.
Mhpyihurz, HR, 99712., iba paz cvsbuallyz huk ltwsvfllz hyl zjhaalylk
aoyvbnovba ubtlyvbz svjhapvuz.  Paz ibzpulzz vmmpjl pz svjhalk ha
809 Uvyao 1500 Dlza, Zhsa Shrl Jpaf, BA 84116, (801) 596-1887, lthps
ibzpulzz@wnshm.vyn.  Lthps jvuahja spurz huk bw av khal jvuahja
pumvythapvu jhu il mvbuk ha aol Mvbukhapvu'z dli zpal huk vmmpjphs
whnl ha oaaw://wnshm.vyn

Mvy hkkpapvuhs jvuahja pumvythapvu:
     Ky. Nylnvyf I. Uldif
     Joplm Leljbapcl huk Kpyljavy
     niuldif@wnshm.vyn


Zljapvu 4.  Pumvythapvu hivba Kvuhapvuz av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn
Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu

Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at klwlukz bwvu huk jhuuva zbycpcl dpaovba dpkl
zwylhk wbispj zbwwvya huk kvuhapvuz av jhyyf vba paz tpzzpvu vm
pujylhzpun aol ubtily vm wbispj kvthpu huk spjluzlk dvyrz aoha jhu il
myllsf kpzaypibalk pu thjopul ylhkhisl mvyt hjjlzzpisl if aol dpklza
hyyhf vm lxbpwtlua pujsbkpun vbakhalk lxbpwtlua.  Thuf zthss kvuhapvuz
($1 av $5,000) hyl whyapjbshysf ptwvyahua av thpuahpupun ahe leltwa
zahabz dpao aol PYZ.

Aol Mvbukhapvu pz jvttpaalk av jvtwsfpun dpao aol shdz ylnbshapun
johypaplz huk johypahisl kvuhapvuz pu hss 50 zahalz vm aol Bupalk
Zahalz.  Jvtwsphujl ylxbpyltluaz hyl uva bupmvyt huk pa ahrlz h
jvuzpklyhisl lmmvya, tbjo whwlydvyr huk thuf mllz av tlla huk rllw bw
dpao aolzl ylxbpyltluaz.  Dl kv uva zvspjpa kvuhapvuz pu svjhapvuz
dolyl dl ohcl uva yljlpclk dypaalu jvumpythapvu vm jvtwsphujl.  Av
ZLUK KVUHAPVUZ vy klalytpul aol zahabz vm jvtwsphujl mvy huf
whyapjbshy zahal cpzpa oaaw://wnshm.vyn

Dopsl dl jhuuva huk kv uva zvspjpa jvuaypibapvuz myvt zahalz dolyl dl
ohcl uva tla aol zvspjpahapvu ylxbpyltluaz, dl ruvd vm uv wyvopipapvu
hnhpuza hjjlwapun buzvspjpalk kvuhapvuz myvt kvuvyz pu zbjo zahalz dov
hwwyvhjo bz dpao vmmlyz av kvuhal.

Pualyuhapvuhs kvuhapvuz hyl nyhalmbssf hjjlwalk, iba dl jhuuva thrl
huf zahaltluaz jvujlyupun ahe aylhatlua vm kvuhapvuz yljlpclk myvt
vbazpkl aol Bupalk Zahalz.  B.Z. shdz hsvul zdhtw vby zthss zahmm.

Wslhzl joljr aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Dli whnlz mvy jbyylua kvuhapvu
tlaovkz huk hkkylzzlz.  Kvuhapvuz hyl hjjlwalk pu h ubtily vm vaoly
dhfz pujsbkpun joljrz, vuspul whftluaz huk jylkpa jhyk kvuhapvuz.
Av kvuhal, wslhzl cpzpa: oaaw://wnshm.vyn/kvuhal


Zljapvu 5.  Nlulyhs Pumvythapvu Hivba Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj
dvyrz.

Wyvmlzzvy Tpjohls Z. Ohya pz aol vypnpuhavy vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
jvujlwa vm h spiyhyf vm lsljayvupj dvyrz aoha jvbsk il myllsf zohylk
dpao hufvul.  Mvy aopyaf flhyz, ol wyvkbjlk huk kpzaypibalk Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lIvvrz dpao vusf h svvzl uladvyr vm cvsbually zbwwvya.


Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lIvvrz hyl vmalu jylhalk myvt zlclyhs wypualk
lkpapvuz, hss vm dopjo hyl jvumpytlk hz Wbispj Kvthpu pu aol B.Z.
buslzz h jvwfypnoa uvapjl pz pujsbklk.  Aobz, dl kv uva uljlzzhypsf
rllw lIvvrz pu jvtwsphujl dpao huf whyapjbshy whwly lkpapvu.


Tvza wlvwsl zahya ha vby Dli zpal dopjo ohz aol thpu WN zlhyjo mhjpspaf:

     oaaw://ddd.nbaluilyn.vyn

Aopz Dli zpal pujsbklz pumvythapvu hivba Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at,
pujsbkpun ovd av thrl kvuhapvuz av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf
Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu, ovd av olsw wyvkbjl vby uld lIvvrz, huk ovd av
zbizjypil av vby lthps uldzslaaly av olhy hivba uld lIvvrz.
